UC Berkeley
UC Berkeley Electronic Theses and Dissertations
Title
Portrait of the Rugged Individualist: The Nonverbal Pride Display Communicates Support for 
Meritocracy
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0v37d9g2
Author
Horberg, Elizabeth Jane
Publication Date
2010
 
Peer reviewed|Thesis/dissertation
eScholarship.org Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California
----------------Portrait of the Rugged Individualist: The Nonverbal Pride Display Communicates 
Support for Meritocracy 
 
By 
 
Elizabeth Jane Horberg 
 
 
A dissertation submitted in partial satisfaction of the  
requirements for the degree of  
Doctor of Philosophy  
in 
Psychology 
in the  
Graduate Division 
of the 
University of California, Berkeley  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Committee in Charge:  
 
Professor Dacher Keltner, Chair 
Professor Serena Chen 
Professor Cameron Anderson 
 
Fall 2010 
----------------Portrait of the Rugged Individualist: The Nonverbal Pride Display Communicates 
Support for Meritocracy 
© 2010 
By Elizabeth Jane Horberg 
----------------Abstract 
Portrait of the Rugged Individualist: The Nonverbal Pride Display Communicates 
Support for Meritocracy 
 
Elizabeth Jane Horberg 
Doctor of Philosophy in Psychology 
University of California, Berkeley 
Professor Dacher Keltner, Chair 
 
Emotions profoundly influence beliefs about morality and justice (Haidt, 2001) 
and emerging research suggests that expressions of emotion communicate an individual’s 
moral attributes to others (e.g., Brown, Palameta, & Moore, 2002). The present research 
examines the moral beliefs signaled by the nonverbal pride display. Pride is triggered by 
appraisals that the self merits high status and greater access to resources (Tracy & Robins, 
2004) and pride’s nonverbal expression has been shown to convey these appraisals to 
observers (Shariff & Tracy, 2009). Guided by appraisal-tendency frameworks of the 
association between distinct emotions and moral beliefs (Horberg, Oveis, & Keltner, 
2010), I predicted that the nonverbal expression of pride would communicate greater 
support for meritocracy—the belief that social and material resources ought to be 
distributed according to merit—relative to egalitarianism, or beliefs that resources ought 
to be distributed in ways that promote equality of outcomes. Study 1 demonstrated these 
effects using unfamiliar male and female targets posing pride or joy in photographs. 
Study 2 found that individuals previously shown a photo of Barack Obama expressing 
pride, relative to a neutral expression, subsequently rated Obama as more likely to 
endorse meritocracy. Finally, Study 3 tests the validity of pride-based inferences of 
support for meritocracy. This study demonstrated that individuals who spontaneously 
expressed pride to a greater degree were more likely to advocate dividing a resource 
between the self and another on the basis of merit rather than equally. Moreover, 
consistent with Studies 1 and 2, observers rated the high-pride expressers as more likely 
to support meritocracy and less likely to support egalitarianism. 
 
 
 
1 
----------------Dedication 
 
This dissertation is dedicated to my graduate advisors, Dacher 
Keltner and Serena Chen, and to my undergraduate advisor, 
Richard Koestner. I will always be grateful for your mentorship.  
i 
----------------Table of Contents 
 
I. Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 1 
II. Nonverbal Emotional Displays Signal Social Attributes Associated with the Emotion 2 
III. An Appraisal-Tendency Approach to the Influence of Distinct Emotions on Moral 
Beliefs.................................................................................................................................. 4 
IV. Past Research on the Nonverbal Pride Display ............................................................. 7 
V. The Present Research ..................................................................................................... 9 
VI. General Discussion ..................................................................................................... 21 
VII. References ................................................................................................................. 23 
VIII. Footnotes ................................................................................................................ 239 
IX. Appendix  .................................................................................................................... 30 
X. Tables and Figures ....................................................................................................... 34 
 
 
 
 
ii 
----------------I. Introduction 
   
Emotions are the heart of social living. They imbue relationships with meaning, 
shape interpersonal behavior and give rise to our core social and moral values (Darwin, 
1874/1952; DeSteno, Petty, Rucker, Wegener, & Braverman, 2004; Frank, 1988; Horberg, 
Oveis, Keltner, & Cohen, 2009; Keltner & Haidt, 1999; Lazarus, 1991; Tiedens & Linton, 
2001). The nonverbal displays that accompany specific emotions facilitate these 
functions by communicating social information to others. People rely on nonverbal 
emotion cues in the face, voice, and body to infer not only a sender’s present emotional 
state, but also her current appraisals (Hareli & Hess, 2010), social roles and status (Tracy, 
2010; Tracy & Robins, 2007) intentions to cooperate or compete (Brown, Palameta, & 
Moore, 2002) as well as her moral values and beliefs (Frijda & Mesquita, 1994; Haidt, 
2001; Zebrowitz & Montpare, 2008a). 
The present research investigates the moral beliefs communicated by the emotion 
of pride. Over the past two decades, moral psychology has witnessed a pronounced shift 
toward the study of the emotional roots of human morality (Greene & Haidt, 2002; Haidt, 
2001). Within this broad development, scholarship has begun to investigate how distinct 
emotions like pride, compassion, disgust or anger, uniquely amplify the perceived value 
of specific moral domains, such as justice, purity or hierarchy. In particular, emotions 
amplify moral domains that are semantically related to the appraisals that elicit and 
persist throughout an emotional state (Horberg et al., 2010; see also Lerner & Keltner; 
Rozin, Lowery, Imada, & Haidt, 1999). For example, disgust, an emotion characterized 
by appraisals of impurity and contamination, has been shown to heighten the perceived 
moral significance of protecting one’s physical and mental purity (Horberg et al., 2009).  
Guided by these recent findings, the present research examines the moral beliefs 
communicated by nonverbal displays of pride. Pride is triggered by appraisals of the 
self’s elevated social worth, strength or status (Tracy & Robins, 2004) and the experience 
of pride leads individuals to perceive the social world in a fashion that enhance hierarchy. 
For instance, pride leads individuals to identify with strong individuals and distance the 
self from weak individuals (Oveis, Horberg, & Keltner, 2010). Extending this work to the 
realm of social inference, I propose that the nonverbal pride display communicates 
support for meritocracy, a hierarchy-enhancing form of distributive justice (Davey, 
Bobocel, Son Hing, & Zanna, 1999; Deutsch, 1975; Raskinski, 1987; Wagstaff, 1994). 
Three studies test this hypothesis by documenting that 1) people infer that others’ 
nonverbal displays of pride signal their commitment to meritocratic beliefs and 2) there is 
validity to this inference. Individuals who display greater nonverbal pride in relevant 
social contexts do in fact ascribe to more meritocratic beliefs.  
1 
----------------II. Nonverbal Emotional Displays Signal Social Attributes Associated with the Emotion 
 
Distinct emotion experiences are accompanied by unique nonverbal displays as 
well as shifts in social perception, belief and intention. By implication, an emotion’s 
nonverbal display serves as a reliable signal of those social perceptions linked to the 
emotion (Hareli & Hess, 2010; Keltner & Kring, 1998; Keltner & Lerner, 2010). This is 
evident in embodiment research showing that people with stronger emotion expressions 
in the face or body, such as of happiness or anger, are more likely to show emotion-
congruent shifts in perception, attitude and judgment (Niedenthal, 2007). For example, 
participants found cartoons more amusing if they had been led to smile rather than 
inhibited from smiling (Strack, Martin, & Stepper, 1988). In related work, people were 
prouder of personal success feedback if they had been manipulated to sit upright, a 
posture indicative of pride, compared to other participants led to slump over (Stepper & 
Strack, 1993).  
The robust association between emotion expression and emotion-specific social-
cognitive changes hints at the motivating idea underlying the present investigation: that 
nonverbal emotion displays may be a useful heuristic to inferring others’ actual values 
and beliefs. Within work on nonverbal emotional behavior, an emergent literature 
documents that observers treat facial expressions of emotion as signs of enduring traits, 
beliefs, behavioral inclinations, and other stable attributes (Frijda & Mesquita, 1994; cf. 
Hess, Blairy & Kleck, 2000). Critical to the present work, observers’ inferences are 
largely consistent in content with the appraisals of the observed emotion (Harseli & Hess, 
2010; Secord, 1958; Zebrowitz & Montpare, 2008a, 2008b). For instance, anger involves 
appraisals that the self has been unjustly harmed and is capable of retaliation (Lazarus, 
1991; Rozin et al., 1999). In line with these appraisals, facial expressions of anger are 
perceived to communicate low affiliation and high dominance (Hess et al., 2008; Marsh, 
Ambady & Kleck, 2005; Zebrowitz & Montpare, 2003). In contrast, fear involves 
appraisals of low certainty, low control, and threat to one’s well-being. Consistent with 
these appraisals, observers view fear-expressing individuals as more submissive (Hess et 
al., 2000; Marsh, Ambady, & Kleck, 2005). With respect to inferences about moral 
beliefs, embarrassment is triggered by appraisals that one has (unintentionally) violated 
group norms or conventions, pointing to the sender’s inherent loyalty to the group and 
desire to restore relations. Given these appraisals, displays of embarrassment act as a 
nonverbal apology (Keltner & Buswell, 1997), and observers infer that individuals who 
display embarrassment, as opposed to other emotions, are highly prosocial and 
committed to cooperating with other group members (Feinberg, Willer, & Keltner, 2010). 
An important question I pursue in the present investigation concerns the validity 
of pride’s proposed moral signal. Evolutionary perspectives hold that emotion 
expressions are valid sources of social information because they are unbidden, 
involuntary and difficult to falsify (Brown & Moore, 2002; Vehrencamp, 2000). These 
features inhibit the evolution of con artists who fake emotions in order to mislead and 
exploit others. Moreover, the capacity to accurately detect the emotional, social and 
moral attributes of others confers evolutionarily significant social benefits. By accurately 
detecting one another’s social intentions, in part by reading emotions, people are able to 
tailor their behavior to satisfy personal and mutual interests (Frank, 1988). For these 
reasons, I propose that the meritocracy beliefs communicated by nonverbal pride displays 
2 
----------------will prove to be accurate. Indeed, observers often demonstrate impressive accuracy in 
inferring social attributes (beyond specific emotional states) from nonverbal behavior. 
Evidence from the thin-slicing and zero-acquaintance literatures illustrate that exposure 
to a minute of a stranger’s nonverbal behavior, or even just to a static image, leads 
observers to reliable and accurate judgements of various personality features, including 
traits, prosociality, socioeconomic status, and trustworthiness (Ambady & Rosenthal, 
1992; Kaul & Schmidt, 1971; Kraus & Keltner, 2009; Verplaetse, Vanneste, & 
Braeckman, 2007).  
Expressions of distinct emotions, these different literatures suggest, signal social 
attributes related to the emotion’s core appraisals. There are few direct investigations of 
this claim. However, such investigations are essential to basic scientific understanding of 
the social function of different expressions, and more specifically, how distinct 
expressions enhance fitness by conveying meaningful information about others. Research 
of this kind also sheds light on the everyday process by which people construct 
impressions of others and quickly transmit information about the self to others. As well, 
exploring these questions vis-à-vis pride, as I do in this research, is particularly important 
given the paucity of work on pride. My studies test the claim that the nonverbal behavior 
associated with feelings of pride leads to accurate inferences about others’ beliefs about 
morality and justice. To guide my hypotheses, I use the appraisal-tendency framework, 
which explains how distinct emotions influence moral beliefs based on the content of the 
emotion’s appraisals (DeSteno et al., 2004; Horberg et al., 2010; Keltner, Horberg, & 
Oveis, 2006; Lerner & Keltner, 2001; Lerner & Tiedens, 2006).  
3 
----------------III. An Appraisal-Tendency Framework of the Influence of Distinct Emotions on Moral 
Beliefs 
 
The appraisal-tendency framework offers specific predictions about how different 
positive and negative emotions amplify beliefs associated with the emotion’s appraisals 
and has linked pride to amplified beliefs in the value of social hierarchy (Han, Lerner & 
Keltner, 2007; Horberg et al., 2010; Lerner & Keltner, 2001). A chief assumption of this 
framework is that unique patterns of cognitive appraisals, which are the meanings and 
interpretations that individuals ascribe to their environments (e.g., Ellsworth & Scherer, 
2003; Lazarus, 1991), trigger emotion and persist throughout the emotion experience. 
These appraisals reflect specific concerns that are relevant to social judgment, such as 
concerns about control, certainty or fairness. During an emotion experience, the 
associated concern is salient and becomes a more prominent guide of subsequent relevant 
judgments (Horberg et al., 2010; Keltner et al., 2006; Lerner & Keltner, 2001). For 
example, the emotion of fear involves appraisals of low control and low certainty. During 
a state of fear, people’s judgments and values reflect increased concerns about 
uncertainty and lack of control. For instance, fearful individuals show an elevated 
preference for risk-averse decisions. In contrast, during a state of anger, people prefer 
risk-seeking decisions, consistent with the appraisals of high control and high certainty 
that define anger (Lerner & Keltner, 2001). 
  Recently, studies have applied the appraisal-tendency framework to understand 
how distinct emotions change social and moral values (Horberg et al., 2010). Here, the 
assumption is that the appraisal patterns of certain emotions are semantically connected 
to specific sociomoral concerns. Sociomoral concerns refer to the several domains of 
morality found across cultures, such as justice, harm/care, purity and hierarchy (Haidt & 
Graham, 2007; Shweder, Much, Mahapatra, & Park, 1997). As a result, when an 
individual experiences one of these emotions, his or her moral beliefs come to 
increasingly reflect the associated sociomoral concern. Empirical work on appraisal-
tendency effects within the moral sphere has focused on four emotion-morality pairings: 
the effects of disgust upon purity, anger upon justice, compassion upon harm-reduction 
and care-taking, and pride upon beliefs about social hierarchy.  
Several investigations illustrate that disgust and anger diverge in their influence 
upon moral values. Disgust, with its attendant appraisals of contamination and impurity, 
has been tied to increased concerns about protecting the purity of the body, mind and soul 
(Haidt & Graham, 2007; Rozin et al., 1999). The experience of anger, by contrast, 
involves appraisals of others’ unjust acts and increases concerns with restoring justice, 
autonomy and individual rights (Berkowitz, 1999; Ortony, Clore, & Collins, 1998). In 
research inspired by this perspective, feeling disgusted by descriptions of impure but 
harmless sexual behavior, such as having sex with a chicken carcass, predicted harsher 
condemnation of the behavior, whereas feeling angry did not. By contrast, feeling angry 
in response to descriptions of unjust behaviors, such as failing to return an overdue book 
needed by another student, predicted harsher condemnation of the unjust behaviors, 
whereas feelings of disgust did not. In keeping with these patterns, temporarily induced 
disgust increased criticism of behaviors perceived to violate purity as well as moral praise 
of behaviors perceived to uphold purity, such as meditation (Horberg et al., 2009). 
Temporarily induced anger has been found to increase support for policies when the 
4 
----------------policies were framed in terms of restoring justice rather than in terms of loss (DeSteno et 
al., 2004).   
The positive emotions of compassion and pride likewise amplify moral beliefs 
associated with their appraisals. Compassion is induced by appraisals of others’ need, and 
heightens concerns about reducing harm and caring for others, particularly weak and 
vulnerable others. Judgments made during a state of compassion reflect these harm/care 
concerns. For instance, participants who have been induced to feel compassion and 
sympathy toward a needy target are more likely to help the target, even at a cost to the 
self (Batson & Shaw, 1991; Eisenberg & Miller, 1987) and even when doing so is unfair 
to a third party (Batson, Klein, Highberger & Shaw, 1995).  
Pride, the emotion I focus upon in this research, amplifies moral beliefs relevant 
to social hierarchy (Horberg et al., 2010; Tracy, Shariff, & Cheng, 2010). Hierarchies 
pervade relationships and are critical to effective group functioning, even in relatively 
egalitarian cultures (Fiske, 1992). They stabilize and organize group life and yield quick 
solutions to evolutionary challenges concerning conflict resolution, protection, division 
of labor, control over resources, and access to mates (de Waal, 1988, 1996; Shiota, 
Keltner, & John, 2006). Given hierarchies’ deep involvement in decisions about 
resources, social influence, control, and protection, it is not surprising that many of our 
beliefs about ethical conduct enhance or preserve hierarchies (Haidt & Graham, 2007; 
Haidt & Joseph, 2008; Shweder et al., 1997). The hierarchy domain unifies a variety of 
moral rules found across cultures. For example, one study showed that respecting 
community leaders, fulfilling one’s role-prescribed duties, and striving for achievement 
through hard work emerged as examples of hierarchy-related moral obligations in the U.S. 
and the Philippines (Vasquez, Keltner, Ebenbach, & Banaszynski, 2001).  
Pride’s major social function is to create, regulate, and reinforce status hierarchies 
(Clark, 1990; Tracy & Robins, 2007). Pride motivates actions and goals that sustain 
hierarchies by increasing one’s relative rank or reinforcing a currently high rank (Cheng, 
Tracy & Henrich, 2010). The appraisals of pride reflect this function: pride arises out of 
appraisals that the self is strong, capable and worthy of high social status. Based on the 
appraisal-tendency framework, I would expect pride to amplify the perceived value of 
hierarchy in contrast to egalitarian social structure. Research partly motivated by this 
assertion has documented the opposing effects of pride and compassion on perceptions of 
psychological distance between the self and other individuals who varied in degree of 
strength and status (Oveis et al., 2010). In one study, participants were manipulated to 
experience either pride or compassion by watching evocative picture slides. Then, 
ostensibly as part of separate research, participants reported how similar they felt to a 
series of target groups, including relatively weak, low-status groups (e.g., homeless 
people) and relatively strong, high-status groups (e.g., corporate lawyers). Participants 
earlier induced to experience pride rated themselves as less similar to groups on average 
than the compassion-induced participants. Moreover, pride-induced participants felt 
particularly different from the weak, low-status groups, but more similar to the strong, 
high-status groups, relative to compassion-induced participants. Pride’s differentiation 
between the weak and the strong, and psychological closeness to strong others, aligns 
with claims that pride activates the concept and importance of social rank, and ultimately 
colors moral beliefs s accordingly. 
5 
----------------In the present research, I examine whether individuals who express pride through 
nonverbal channels are perceived as more likely to support a hierarchy-enhancing form of 
distributive justice: meritocracy. Distributive justice pertains to beliefs about whether a 
division of goods and resources is ethical or unethical. Resource allocation strategies can 
be parsed into the two classes of meritocracy and egalitarianism (Deutsch, 1975, 1985; 
Rasinski, 1987). With meritocracy, individuals are allocated resources (e.g., money, 
positions of power) according to a criterion of merit, such as performance, contribution or 
ability. This approach organizes group members hierarchically, and reflects an underlying 
belief that fairness is rooted in equity (Walster, Berscheid, & Walster, 1971), and that 
groups prosper when high-achieving members are rewarded (Wagstaff, 1994). By 
contrast, an egalitarian resource allocation strategy places less emphasis on achievement, 
aims to create equality of outcomes among group members and to eliminate hierarchy. 
Depending on group conditions, equality of outcomes is achieved through two kinds of 
allocation methods: distributing resources evenly across group members (i.e., equality) or 
preferentially to those in need (Rasinski, 1987; Wagstaff, 1994). 
Research directly related to my hypotheses relating pride displays to support for 
meritocracy is scarce. However, some evidence implies that the experience of pride 
increases devotion to tasks when social outcomes are based on merit. Across several 
studies, individuals manipulated to experience pride, compared to other positive emotions, 
were subsequently more likely to persevere and succeed at difficult tasks in paradigms 
when outcomes (social approval) were based on task performance (Verbeke, Belschak, & 
Bagozzi, 2004; Williams & DeSteno, 2008, 2009). With these preliminary data 
suggesting that pride may enhance the perceived value of meritocracy, I propose that the 
nonverbal expression of pride signals these beliefs to social observers. 
6 
----------------IV. Past Research on the Nonverbal Pride Display 
 
Pride has only recently come into focus in the literature on emotional expression. 
Researchers are beginning to detail the expressive components of pride, and to explore 
the character attributes signaled by pride (Shariff & Tracy, 2009; Tiedens, Ellsworth, & 
Mesquita, 2000; Tracy & Matsumoto, 2007;). The prototypical pride display involves an 
expanded posture, slight backward head tilt, small smile, with fists planted on the hips or 
raised over the head in a “V” (Tracy & Robins 2004b; Tracy, Robins, & Lagattuta, 2006). 
Pride displays are highly recognizable and potentially universal. Even individuals from 
pre-linguistic cultures who maintain virtually no contact with Western society label 
images of Westerners expressing pride with a degree of accuracy comparable to that of 
“basic” emotions like disgust and anger (Tracy & Robins, 2008). Moreover, congenitally 
blind individuals were found to spontaneously display pride after prevailing in 
competitions in a manner similar to sighted individuals. Finally, both American and 
Japanese Olympic wrestlers produced similar expressions of pride (e.g., tilted the head 
back and raised their arms in a “V”) after a victory at the Olympic Games (Tracy & 
Matsumoto, 2008).  
Building upon these findings, scholars have theorized that the pride display 
evolved from the dominance displays prevalent in primate societies. Evolutionary 
accounts hold that pride has an adaptive role in group governance by drawing attention to 
socially valuable individuals, and alerting both the self and others that one deserves 
increased status and acceptance. Doing so helps group members to select appropriate 
responses in interactions with high- or low-status individuals, to forge constructive 
alliances and to positively influence their own rank (Shariff & Tracy, 2009). In this way, 
the pride display enables the quick negotiation of hierarchies, and consequently, conflict-
free resolution of social issues including how to allocate resources (Tracy et al., in press; 
Tracy & Robins, 2004a, 2004b).  
A growing body of work illustrates that observers automatically infer status 
information even from nonverbal displays of pride, even displays that are static and 
context-free. Across several studies, Shariff and Tracy (2009) found that participants 
were quicker to pair high status words with a target individual when the target posed 
pride, compared to shame, embarrassment, happiness, disgust or anger. Similarly, 
participants were more likely to describe a novel piece of artwork as “high-status” if the 
artwork had been preceded with a subliminal image of an individual posing pride, rather 
than a non-emotional stimulus. In other relevant work, participants were more likely to 
believe that an individual occupied a higher-status position—company boss rather than 
employee—when the individual was described as reacting to a positive event with pride 
rather than gratitude (Tiedens et al., 2000).  
Taken together, these findings suggest that observers use the pride expression to 
arrive at fairly accurate judgments of a sender’s status appraisals. What is not known, 
however, is whether the nonverbal expression of pride reliably and validly signals the 
amplified moral significance of hierarchy, and more specifically, increased support for 
meritocracy, as the appraisal tendency framework would anticipate. I thus examine 
whether a stronger nonverbal pride display leads observers to infer greater support for 
meritocracy.  
7 
----------------I also examine whether the pride display is a valid signal of support for 
meritocracy by testing whether it predicts actual support for meritocracy. The validity 
question is critical, in part because of its important implications for interpersonal 
behavior. As noted earlier, the detection of others’ traits can improve interactions and 
individual fitness. Accurate inferences of others’ moral beliefs and distributive justice 
orientations—predominantly meritocratic versus predominantly egalitarian—help 
observers adjust their expectations and behavior in a number of useful ways. For 
instance, the ability to distinguish between meritocratic and egalitarian individuals may 
help people anticipate whether another person will work hard to earn rewards versus 
expect to be taken care of by others or to receive equal shares regardless of input. It may 
also help people identify others who would be willing to share their hard-earned rewards. 
These expectations, in turn, can shape decisions about whether or with whom to initiate 
close relationships. For reasons such as these, the ability to reliably distinguish “rugged 
individualists” on the basis of nonverbal cues may be very valuable.  
8 
----------------V. The Present Research 
 
Three studies test two overarching claims. First, I investigate the moral inferences 
associated with the nonverbal pride display. I test the claim that expressing pride, relative 
to other emotions, leads observers to perceive senders as more likely to value meritocracy 
and less likely to value egalitarianism. Second, I examine whether the inferred meaning 
of the pride display predicts the real behavior of social actors, which would reveal the 
validity of the signal. Here, I analyze whether individuals prone to expressing pride do, in 
fact, advocate rewarding merit over establishing equality of outcomes. 
I test these predictions across a variety of targets, including unfamiliar male and 
female individuals (Study 1 & 3), and perceptions of a well-known political figure (Study 
2). Across studies, I contrast the nonverbal pride expression to either the nonverbal 
expression of joy, which features a large, Duchenne (genuine) smile, or to a neutral 
expression. The comparison to joy is crucial because, as with pride, joy signals positive 
feelings. However, it does not communicate appraisals of heightened status (Shariff & 
Tracy, 2009). As a result, any differences in the effects of the pride and joy expression on 
value inferences cannot be attributed to differences in the valence of an expressed 
emotion. Equally important, contrasting the pride expression against a neutral expression 
allows me to examine whether perceptions of pride influence observer inferences of 
support for meritocracy relative to the perceived absence of emotion. This comparison 
helps determine if shifts in perceived support for meritocracy are driven by perceptions of 
a target’s pride, as predicted, rather than a comparison emotion. 
As in past work on the relations between emotions and moral judgments, I 
primarily examine perceptions of support for meritocracy and egalitarianism in terms of 
general beliefs about how society “ought” to operate. Assessing general beliefs that have 
no direct implications for the target helps determine if, as I expect, pride conveys a 
message of increased moral support of meritocracy and not (solely) a selfish message of 
support for policies that benefit the self.  
 
Study 1: Effects of the Pride Expression on Inferences of Support for Meritocracy in 
Unfamiliar Individuals 
 
With as little as a single photograph, people quickly and easily decode the 
emotions of strangers, and use this information to make snap judgments about traits such 
as warmth, competence, dominance, submissiveness, and cooperative intent (Knutson, 
1996; Reis et al., 1990; Verplaetse et al., 2007). Study 1 examined first impressions of 
support for meritocracy and egalitarianism with respect to unfamiliar individuals in 
photographs who displayed either the prototypical pride or prototypical joy expression.  
I expected participants to perceive a target individual as more likely to endorse 
meritocracy and less likely to endorse egalitarianism when the target expressed pride 
compared to joy. Moreover, I examined two alternative hypotheses: 1) that these effects 
would differ by target gender, and 2) that these effects would be accounted for by how 
much participants liked the target. Regarding target gender, people stereotype men as 
more likely to experience and express pride (Plant, Hyde, Keltner, & Devine, 2000), 
which suggests the possibility that only men’s expressions will be treated as a legitimate 
source of personality information. However, recent research shows that pride and joy 
9 
----------------expressions are readily detected and used to interpret status in both male and female 
strangers (Tracy, Shariff & Cheng, 2010). Therefore, I expected that the hypothesized 
effects of pride displays on inferences of support for meritocracy would not vary 
depending on target gender.  
Regarding target liking, I reasoned that participants may prefer targets when they 
express joy than pride, given that people form particularly positive impressions of 
individuals with large, sincere smiles—the hallmark of the joy expression (e.g., Reis et 
al., 1990). Given the positivity also attributed to characteristics of egalitarianism, such as 
cooperativeness (Anderson, 1968), it is possible that the proposed effects could be due to 
differences in positive views of the target, rather than to the role of emotion expressions 
in communicating moral beliefs. I therefore examine whether the hypothesized effects 
can be accounted for by target liking. 
 
Method 
 
Participants 
Two hundred and forty undergraduate students (62% female, 5% unreported) 
participated in exchange for Psychology course credit. The mean age was 21 years old 
and the most common ethnicities were East or South Asian (53%) and Caucasian (30%).   
 
Procedure 
Participants completed a web-based survey (www.qualtrics.com) during mass 
testing sessions held at the start of the academic semester. First they provided 
demographic information. Next, following a number of filler tasks unrelated to this 
research, participants viewed and made ratings about one unfamiliar individual presented 
in a photograph. As a cover story, participants were told that the study investigated the 
accuracy of first impressions of the values and emotions of strangers. Participants were 
presented with one of eight images. The image depicted a Caucasian woman or man 
expressing either pride or joy. Participants estimated the target’s level of support for 
meritocracy and egalitarianism, as well as the target’s emotions. Finally, participants 
rated their level of liking of the target.  
 
Materials 
Target images. Static images of four unfamiliar target individuals (2 women, 2 
men) were used in this research. 1 Each target was photographed posing the pride and joy 
expression, for a total of eight target images (see Appendix A for samples). Targets wore 
plain clothing and images showed their faces and torsos. Pride targets posed with their 
hands on their hips, heads tilted back slightly and a low intensity smile (Tracy & Robins, 
2004). Joy targets posed with their arms at their sides and showed intense Duchenne 
smiles, which are smiles that involve the activation of muscles that lift the lip corners up 
and contract muscles surrounding the eyes.  
Perceived support for meritocracy and egalitarianism. Drawing upon previous 
research (Rubinski, 1987), I created four meritocracy and four egalitarianism items (see 
Appendix B). Data from an independent sample of participants (N = 26) confirmed that 
meritocracy statements were viewed as representing an ideology of meritocracy whereas 
egalitarian statements represented an ideology of egalitarianism. These participants were 
10 
----------------asked to rate the extent to which each statement reflected the view “that society should 
distribute resources and power according to merit, so people’s outcomes are determined 
by what they have earned” (meritocracy score) and the view “that society should 
distribute resources and power to create equality, so all people have equal outcomes” 
(egalitarianism score) on scales ranging from 1 (Not at all) to 7 (Extremely). All four 
meritocracy items received significantly higher meritocracy scores (M = 5.87) than 
egalitarianism scores (M = 2.57). All four egalitarian values statements received higher 
egalitarianism scores (M = 5.45) than meritocracy scores (M = 3.22), and the differences 
of three out of four items reached statistical significance.  
In the main study, participants rated the extent to which the target would agree 
with each statement (1 = Strongly disagree, 5 = Strongly Agree). Ratings of the 
meritocracy items were averaged to create a meritocracy score (alpha = .70). Egalitarian 
items were averaged to form an egalitarianism score (alpha = .70). The two scores were 
negatively correlated (r = -.53, p < .001). 
Target emotions. Participants estimated the extent to which the target tends to 
experience “pride” and “joy” (1 = Not at all, 7 = Extremely). These two items were 
embedded among filler emotions to conceal the purpose of the study. 
Target liking. Participants reported how much they thought they would like the 
target (1 = Not at all, 7 = A whole lot). 
 
Results 
 
Preliminary Statistics 
  Confirming the effectiveness of the expression manipulation, participants rated 
the targets as significantly more likely to experience pride if exposed to the pride version 
of the target (M = 4.44) relative to the joy version (M = 3.47), F(1, 232) = 80.93, p < 
.001. They rated targets as significantly more likely to experience joy when exposed to 
the joy version (M = 4.26) relative to the pride version (M = 3.77), F(1, 233) = 25.69, p < 
.001.  
Participants liked the targets significantly more when they expressed joy (M = 
4.73) compared to pride (M = 3.47), F(235) = 54.12, p < .001, consistent with research 
demonstrating that joyful individuals are perceived as highly affiliative, social, and 
positive in general (Knutson, 1996; Reis et al., 1990). I therefore controlled for target 
liking in analyses reported below.  
 
Central Analyses 
  To test the central hypothesis that participants would perceive proud targets as 
more likely to endorse meritocracy and less likely to endorse egalitarianism than joy 
targets, I conducted a 2 (Target expression) x 2 (Target values) mixed ANCOVA, 
controlling for target liking. There was no main effect of target expression (F < 1). A 
main effect of values emerged, wherein all targets were attributed stronger support for 
meritocracy (M = 3.50) than egalitarianism (M = 3.32), F(1, 233) = 24.09, p < .001. Most 
importantly, this was qualified by the predicted Expression x Values interaction, F(1, 
233) = 7.24, p < .01. 
To interpret the interaction, I separately examined the effects of target expression 
on meritocracy and egalitarianism scores, while controlling for target liking. As 
11 
----------------predicted, targets were attributed stronger meritocracy scores when they expressed pride 
(M = 3.69) than when they expressed joy (M = 3.31), F(1, 233) = 7.31, p < .01. 
Conversely, targets were attributed stronger egalitarianism scores when they expressed 
joy (M = 3.53) than when they expressed pride (M = 3.11), F(1, 235) = 3.85, p = .05. 
Furthermore, within the pride expression condition, I found that support for meritocracy 
was significantly higher than support for egalitarianism, F(1, 114) = 27.22, p < .001. 
Within the joy condition, perceived support for egalitarianism was nonsignificantly 
higher than perceived support for meritocracy, F(1, 118) = 1.85, p = .18. Figure 1 depicts 
these patterns. Follow-up tests showed that target gender did not moderate the effect of 
the Expression x Values interaction on perceived support for meritocracy or perceived 
support for egalitarianism (p > .15). 
 
Discussion 
 
Study 1 provided the first evidence that, relative to nonverbal displays of joy, 
nonverbal displays of pride communicate greater support for meritocracy and reduced 
support for egalitarianism. Importantly, these effects emerged regardless of how well 
targets were liked and did not differ depending on targets’ gender.  
This initial study focused on first impressions of unfamiliar targets. It is feasible, 
however, that static emotion expressions only lead to perceptions of support for 
meritocracy and egalitarianism in strangers because little other relevant information is 
available. Study 2 therefore examined whether pride displays would evoke different 
inferences for a well-known figure, President Barack Obama.  
 
Study 2: Effects of Barack Obama Nonverbal Pride Expression on Perceptions of His 
Meritocracy and Egalitarian Values 
 
Study 2 builds on Study 1 in several respects. First, instead of snap judgments of 
strangers, I investigate the role of the pride display in guiding inferences about Barack 
Obama, a familiar individual who, in the eyes of the perceiver, may already be linked to a 
specific ideology. Given that people may have robust preconceived notions about 
Obama’s values, Study 2 represents a more conservative test of my hypotheses.  
Second, I compare the pride display to a neutral expression. This decision was 
partly motivated by pilot testing showing that images in which Obama wore a pure, 
prototypical expression of joy by scientific criteria (large Duchenne smile and no 
presence of pride cues), were perceived as equally high in pride and joy. This is perhaps 
not surprising; studies show that the positive emotional reactions of high-status 
individuals are often interpreted as high in pride, relative to lower-status individuals 
(Tiedens et al., 2000, Study 1b). Given these constraints, I was unable to compare the 
pride expression to an expression of joy. Additionally, an important advantage of using a 
neutral comparison is that, in conjunction with the results of Study 1, the anticipated 
results of this study would imply that any differences in perceived support for 
meritocracy are driven by the pride display, rather than a comparison expression.  As a 
final extension, I tested my hypotheses in a community sample. 
 
Method 
12 
---------------- Participants  
One hundred and twenty-two participants (61% female, 2% unreported) were 
recruited online using Amazon Mechanical Turk (www.mturk.com). Participants were 
paid fifty cents in exchange for completing a web-based survey hosted on an external 
website (www.qualtrics.com). Participants’ mean age was 34 years old and the most 
common ethnicities were Caucasian (69%), East or South Asian (22%) and African-
American (6%).  
 
Procedure 
As a cover story, participants were told that the study investigated personality 
perceptions of various celebrities. They were then presented with one of two images of 
Barack Obama and informed that they would rate the celebrity in the photograph. The 
image either portrayed Obama expressing pride or no emotion. First, participants 
completed a task assessing perceptions of Obama’s support for meritocracy and 
egalitarianism. Afterward, they rated their level of liking for Obama and perceptions of 
the emotions that Obama expressed in the image. Demographic data were gathered at the 
end of the survey.  
 
Materials 
Obama images. The pride and neutral images of Obama were publicly available, 
digital photographs posted on political and media websites. An initial pool of potential 
images was gathered by a team of individuals trained in the identification of emotion 
through nonverbal display. In the candidate pride images, Obama displayed one or more 
features of the prototypical pride display. Neutral images were selected by identifying 
images in which Obama gazed straight ahead and showed no discernible facial muscle 
movements, no discernible hand gestures and no meaningful postural movements. The 
two final images were selected on the basis of pilot data from an independent sample of 
participants (n = 20) who rated the extent to which Obama expressed feeling proud and 
neutral (1 = Not at all, 7 = Extremely) in each image. Pairwise comparisons of the images 
ultimately selected for use in the main study confirmed that Obama was rated as feeling 
prouder in the pride image (M = 6.45) than in the neutral image (M = 2.50), p < .001. He 
was rated as feeling more neutral in the neutral image (M = 3.45) than in the pride image 
(M = 1.25), p < .001. For the main study, both target images were set against a solid gray 
background (see Appendix A). 
Perceptions of Obama’s support for meritocracy and egalitarianism. Participants 
were presented with a series of quotes and instructed to estimate the likelihood that 
Obama had actually uttered each statement (1= Very unlikely, 7 = Very likely). I created 
three categories of quotes: meritocratic, egalitarian and real (see Appendix B). 
Meritocracy and egalitarian quotes were created from the meritocracy and egalitarianism 
items used in Study 1. Additionally, I included six real quotes spoken by Obama during 
media appearances. This comparison would reveal whether there were baseline condition 
differences in participants’ ability to recognize false quotes, which could confound results 
of the hypothesis tests. Ratings of meritocracy quotes were averaged (alpha = .76), as 
were ratings of egalitarianism quotes (alpha = .57) and real quotes (alpha = .60). The 
meritocracy and egalitarianism scales were uncorrelated (r = -.03, ns). 
13 
----------------Obama liking. Participants responded to the item: “Overall, how positive or 
negative is your opinion of this person” (1 = Very negative, 7 = Very positive). 
Perceptions of Obama’s expressed emotions. Participants were presented with 
their randomly assigned image of Obama and asked to rate extent to which Obama 
expressed feeling “proud” and “neutral” (1 = Not at all, 7 = Extremely).  
 
Results 
 
Three IP addresses appeared twice in the data set, suggesting that three 
participants may have repeated the survey. In those three cases, I excluded data from the 
second time the survey was taken from that IP address.  
 
Preliminary Statistics 
  Consistent with pilot tests, Obama was perceived as feeling significantly prouder 
in the pride expression condition (M = 5.47) than in the neutral expression condition (M = 
4.75), F(1, 116) = 6.58, p < .05. He was perceived as feeling significantly more neutral in 
the neutral expression condition (M = 4.09) than in the pride expression condition (M = 
3.19), F(1, 118) = 8.86, p < .01.  
The degree to which participant’s liked Obama did not differ across the 
expression conditions, F(1, 116) = .01, ns. I therefore do not control for liking during 
central analyses. 
 
Central Analyses 
My central hypothesis is that participants exposed to images of Obama expressing 
pride would estimate that he was more likely to have spoken the meritocracy quotes, but 
not egalitarianism or real quotes, relative to participants exposed to images of Obama 
conveying a neutral expression. A 2 (Expression: Pride or Neutral) x 3 (Quotes: 
Meritocracy, Egalitarianism, Real) mixed ANOVA was conducted to test these 
predictions.  A significant main effect of quotes emerged, wherein Obama was estimated 
as more likely to have spoken the egalitarianism quotes (M = 5.15) than the meritocracy 
quotes (M = 3.42) or real quotes (M = 4.22), F(2, 232) = 85.49, p < .05. More 
importantly, however, these main effects were qualified by the predicted Expression x 
Quotes interaction, F(2, 232) = 3.68, p < .05. To decompose the interaction, I examine 
the effects of expression condition separately for each category of quote. As predicted, 
participants were marginally more likely to attribute meritocracy quotes to Obama when 
exposed to the pride image (M = 3.64) than when exposed to the neutral image (M = 
3.17), F(1, 116) = 3.68, p = .058. Attribution of the egalitarianism quotes and real quotes 
did not vary by expression condition (ps > .20). Figure 2 graphs these patterns.   
 
Discussion 
 
Study 2 found that recent exposure to an image of Barack Obama expressing 
pride led participants to infer that Obama was more likely to have made statements 
endorsing meritocracy than recent exposure to an image of Obama wearing a neutral 
expression. However, emotion expression did not affect perceptions of the likelihood that 
Obama had made statements reflecting egalitarianism, or statements that he actually had 
14 
----------------spoken in the past. These results conceptually replicate the meritocracy findings from 
Study 1, but extend them to perceptions of a familiar political figure. I would argue that 
this extension is noteworthy due to the conservative nature of the test. The emotion 
expression prime was relatively subtle and participants almost certainly held pre-existing 
beliefs about Obama’s character. I nevertheless detected an effect of the nonverbal pride 
expression on participants of Obama’s support for meritocracy. 
Unlike Study 1, Obama’s expression of pride did not decrease inferences 
concerning his support for egalitarianism, relative to a control expression. There are 
several plausible reasons for these null findings. First, participants appeared to firmly 
believe in Obama’s high egalitarianism (see Figure 2). These beliefs, quite likely pre-
existing, may have been too fixed to be influenced by the expression primes. A second 
explanation concerns the expression stimuli. The images in this study were candid rather 
than posed, making it possible that Obama’s expressions were more emotionally 
ambiguous than those of Study 1. This potential ambiguity could have weakened the 
influence of the pride expression on perceptions of Obama’s support for egalitarianism.   
Studies 1 and 2 yielded strong evidence of the role of the nonverbal pride display 
in communicating support for meritocracy. These findings beg an important question: 
Are observers’ inferences veridical? This analysis will point to whether the pride display 
is a valid signal of support for meritocracy and enhances the accuracy of moral 
impressions.  
In Study 3, I examine whether, during a real social interaction, the nonverbal 
pride display would predict actual behavior indicative of support for meritocracy. 
Additionally, I test whether these same nonverbal pride displays predict naïve observers’ 
inferences of support for meritocracy, consistent with the first two studies. 
 
Study 3: The Role of the Nonverbal Pride Display in Actual and Inferred Support for 
Meritocracy during Dyadic Interactions 
 
Study 3 is a multi-method investigation of the claim that nonverbal pride displays 
reliably and accurately communicate level of support for meritocracy to social observers. 
To test this claim, I examine the two fundamental components of person perception: cue 
validity and cue usage (Ambady & Rosenthal, 1991; Borkenau & Liebler, 1992; 
Brunswick, 1956; Funder & Sneed, 1993).  
First, I consider cue validity, which pertains to the type of behavioral cues that 
actually correlate with certain social attributes. Past work has shown that nonverbal 
displays of a distinct emotion correlate with social attributes related to the emotion’s core 
appraisals, providing evidence that the display is a valid indicator of those attributes. As 
examples, facial expressions of anger are associated with attributing events to human 
rather than situational factors (Keltner, Ellsworth, & Edwards, 1993), and people with 
joyful, authentic smiles are higher in agreeableness, affiliation and extraversion (Harker 
& Keltner, 2001; Naumann, Vazire, Rentfrow, & Gosling, 2009). In the present study, I 
hypothesize that stronger nonverbal pride (but not joy) displays will predict participants’ 
actual level of support for meritocracy and egalitarianism. 
Second, I examine cue usage, or the nonverbal cues that observers use to infer 
which individuals possess an attribute of interest (regardless of whether or not those cues 
are valid). In past research, observers have been found to rely on nonverbal emotion 
15 
----------------displays to infer an array of different attributes, including dominance, affiliation, 
competence and sociability (Harseli & Hess, 2010; Knutson, 1996; Zebrowitz & 
Montpare, 2008a, 2008b). Moreover, Studies 1 and 2 of the present research showed that 
observers tend to attribute stronger support for meritocracy and reduced support for 
egalitarianism to individuals with stronger nonverbal displays of pride. I test the same cue 
usage hypothesis in Study 3. 
Study 3 also makes several important methodological advances. I test my cue 
usage and cue validity hypotheses using a thin-slicing paradigm (Ambady & Rosenthal, 
1991), in which nonverbal displays emitted during a brief, potentially pride-eliciting 
event (discussing one’s greatest strengths) are used to predict participants’ actual 
meritocracy and egalitarianism beliefs as well as observer estimates of those beliefs. A 
major advantage of the thin-slicing approach is that it uses a more ecologically valid 
setting. Emotion expressions are real rather than posed, dynamic rather than static, and 
contextualized rather than independent of the social situation. Within this paradigm, I 
employ multiple methods to examine the proposed effects, including nonverbal coding of 
emotion expressions, narrative coding of participants’ responses in an allocation task, and 
naïve observer ratings on several different scales assessing estimates of participants’ 
support for meritocracy and egalitarianism.  
 
Method 
 
Participants 
One hundred and six (55% female) undergraduates participated in exchange for 
Psychology course credit. Participants completed the study in pairs. Pairs were created 
through random assignment with the condition that partners not know one another. The 
most common ethnicities were East or South Asian (45%) and Caucasian (43%).  
 
Procedure and Materials 
This videotaped social interaction study was conducted in a 10- X 14-ft. 
laboratory room outfitted with partially concealed video cameras. Participants were 
aware of the cameras and gave consent both before and after the study session. Partners 
sat about three feet apart and cameras were positioned to film the full length of both 
participants. The experimenter explained that they would complete a mock job interview 
for a lab manager position. As part of this interview, participants took turns describing 
their greatest strengths. After completing other tasks, participants were seated at separate 
tables and privately reported how they would fairly divide a $5,000 signing bonus 
between the self and partner based on the interview. Participants then wrote a paragraph 
to explain why they chose to divide the money as they did (i.e., their allocation strategy). 
To boost the validity of the money allocation task, participants learned that a panel of 
researchers would later read their responses. Those with the best responses would receive 
a free iPod. Demographic data were collected at the end of the study.3 
  Coding Pride and Joy Nonverbal Displays. For each participant, a team of three 
coders watched the video clip from the moment the participant began describing his or 
her greatest strengths until the moment he or she finished (average length: 26 seconds). 
The sound was muted and the participant’s partner was concealed to prevent partner 
nonverbal behavior from influencing codes.  Coders were informed of the anatomical 
16 
----------------movements associated with pride displays, such as the backward head tilt, low intensity 
smile, and erect posture. They were also informed of movements that denote joy, namely 
the presence of a Duchenne smile. 
After watching the clip, coders rated the overall intensity with which each 
participant expressed feeling “confident” and “joy” (0 = Not at all, 3 = A whole lot) while 
describing his or her strengths. In this study, I coded pride with the label “confident”—a 
term used to assess authentic pride in past research (Tracy & Robins, 2007)—because 
pre-tests revealed floor effects in ratings of “proud” (M = .26; SD = .30), but not ratings 
of “confident”. (M = 1.67; SD = .59). Supporting this operationalization, ratings of 
“confident” correlated substantially with ratings of “proud” (r = .46*, pr = .45* 
controlling for “joy”) but not ratings of “joy” (r = .14, ns, pr = .06, controlling for 
“confident”).  
Coders rated every videotape. Inter-rater reliabilities for “confident” (Cronbach’s 
alpha = .72) and for “joy” (alpha = .75) were satisfactory. I averaged across codes to 
create a nonverbal pride code and a nonverbal joy code for each participant.  
Coding Participants’ Allocation Strategies. Four coders (three of whom had also 
coded the nonverbal expressions) read transcriptions of the participants’ allocation 
strategies, and coded the degree to which each strategy focused on merit and focused on 
equality. Specifically, they rated: “To what extent does the participant focus on splitting 
the money according to MERIT (i.e., performance in the interview task)?” and “To what 
extent does the participant advocate splitting the money EQUALLY, regardless of 
performance or any other factor?” (0 = Not at all, 3 = A whole lot). All coders rated every 
transcript. Cronbach’s alphas were .77 and .88 for the merit-focused and equality-focused 
allocation strategy codes, respectively. I averaged across coder ratings to arrive at final 
allocation strategy codes for each participant. The codes for meritocratic and egalitarian 
justifications were negatively correlated (r = -.63, p < .001). 
Observer Inferences of Support for Meritocracy and Egalitarianism. An 
independent sample of 4 undergraduate naïve observers (3 male, 1 female) watched the 
clips of participants describing their greatest strengths. After each clip, they estimated the 
target participant’s support for meritocracy and egalitarianism on two types of measures. 
On the first measure, observers read the following description:  Suppose that later in the 
study, this person is asked to divide a pool of $5000 between himself/herself and the 
partner in the mock interview. S/he must choose the fairest division and justify this 
division. Observers then rated the likelihood with which the participant would (1) 
advocate dividing the money according to merit (performance in the interview), and (2) 
the likelihood that the participant would advocate dividing the money equally, regardless 
of performance or any other factor (1 = Highly Unlikely, 7 = Highly Likely). Cronbach’s 
alphas were .60 for estimates of merit-focus in the money allocation task and .52 for 
perceptions of equality-focus. For the second measure, the four observers rated each of 
the participants on the 4-item meritocracy and egalitarianism scales used in Studies 1 and 
2. On this measure, Cronbach’s alpha was .82 for perceptions of support for meritocracy 
and .70 for perceptions of support for egalitarianism.  
After finishing all ratings, observers underwent a funneled debriefing procedure 
that allowed me to check for conscious awareness of the role of nonverbal expressions in 
shaping impressions of target participants. Observers were asked to speculate on the 
research hypotheses, as well as to report any specific cues or information they used to 
17 
----------------guide their ratings. None of the observers had deciphered the study hypotheses, nor did 
any report relying on emotion expressions to guide their ratings. 
 
Results 
 
One participant did not describe his greatest strengths. His data and his partner’s 
data were removed from analyses. 
 
Preliminary Analyses 
First I tested for gender differences on all predictor and outcome variables. There 
were no actor gender differences in the amount of signing bonus money allocated to the 
self (vs. partner), or on the merit-focused and equality-focused codes. Consistent with 
past research on gender differences in emotion expression (Kring & Gordon, 1998), men 
expressed marginally more pride than women, whereas women expressed significantly 
more joy than men (ps < .07). With regard to thin slicing, women were viewed as more 
egalitarian and less meritocratic on both the money allocation strategy and scale measures 
(ps < .05). I control for actor gender in central analyses. Partner gender and the actor x 
partner gender interaction were unrelated to all predictors and outcomes with the 
exception that people allocated more money to male partners ($2,537) than to female 
partners ($2,268), F(1, 98) = 7.32, p < .05. 
As in the previous studies, I sought to rule out the possibility that the predicted 
association between pride and perceived support for meritocracy, relative to joy and 
perceived egalitarianism, is due to observers’ highly positive views of joyful individuals 
(Harker & Keltner, 2001; Reis et al., 1990). First, I tested the relationship of target liking 
to the other study variables. Naïve observers’ ratings of the likeability of each target 
generally reached consensus (alpha = .67), so I created an average liking score for each 
target. Target liking did not predict nonverbal pride or estimates of merit-focus on the 
money allocation task. However, liking was associated with greater nonverbal joy, higher 
estimates of equality-focus on the allocation task, and higher estimates of targets’ scores 
on the meritocracy and egalitarianism values scales. I control for target liking in the thin-
slice analyses. 
Intraclass correlations examining the relationship between actor and partner 
expressions of emotion revealed a marginal positive relationship between actor and 
partner expressions of pride (ICC r = .13, p = .088), and a significant relationship for 
actor and partner expressions of joy (ICC r = .24, p < .01).  
 
Cue validity: Do nonverbal pride displays predict actual support for meritocracy and 
egalitarianism?  
My cue validity hypothesis was that participants who nonverbally express greater 
pride would be more likely to report allocating the $5,000 between the self and partner on 
the basis of merit rather than equality. In contrast, I expected no relationship between 
nonverbal expressions joy and advocating merit versus equality. Since assumptions of 
independence of observations are violated in this study, data were analyzed using the 
actor-partner interdependence model (Kenny, Kashy & Cook, 2006).  
The first model estimated the effects of nonverbal expressions of pride and joy on 
participants’ actual level of merit focus in the money allocation task. The merit-focus 
18 
----------------code was entered as the outcome variable. Codes of actor pride, actor joy, partner pride, 
and partner joy were entered as predictors. The actor pride x actor joy interaction was 
entered to examine the role expressions of pride at different levels of joy. Actor gender 
was included as a control variable. Results are depicted in Table 1. As expected, actor 
expressions of pride predicted a greater focus on merit on the part of the actor, whereas 
all other predictors were unrelated.  
A similar second model examined the relationship of nonverbal expressions to the 
level of equality focus. There was a trend for actor pride to predict a reduced focus on 
equality, as I would anticipate, although this association was not statistically significant 
(p = .11). Interestingly, participants focused more on equality if their partner expressed 
greater pride. I speculate on this finding in the study discussion. 
Altogether, the data support my hypothesis that expressions of pride are a valid 
indicator of an individual’s belief in the value of meritocracy. However, an alternative 
interpretation of these results is that pride, being a self-conscious emotion, signals 
increased selfishness. Perhaps the prouder participants apportioned a greater share of the 
money to the self, and then endorsed a meritocratic allocation strategy merely to justify 
their selfish decision. To test this explanation, I examined the number of dollars allocated 
to the self versus partner using the same predictors as above. Contrary to the alternative 
hypothesis, there was no relationship between expressing pride and allocating money to 
the self versus partner (ps > .40).  
 
Cue usage: Do nonverbal pride displays predict observer estimates of participant 
support for meritocracy and egalitarianism? 
The next set of analyses tested the hypothesis participants with stronger nonverbal 
pride (but not joy) displays in the video clips would be rated by observers as more 
meritocratic rather than egalitarian. I analyzed two different measures: estimates of 
support for meritocracy and egalitarianism in participants’ justifications for their 
monetary allocations and in estimates of their broader moral beliefs, relative to 
participants with weaker nonverbal pride displays.  Four separate analyses were 
conducted to examine observer estimates of the two allocation strategies and observer 
estimates on the meritocracy and egalitarianism scales used in Studies 1 and 2. Predictors 
in each model were actor and partner joy and pride, the actor pride x actor joy interaction, 
as well as the control variables of target gender and target liking. 
Table 2 presents the results. As expected, observers attributed a stronger merit-
focused allocation strategy and a weaker equality-focused allocation strategy to 
participants who had been coded as having stronger nonverbal pride displays. Nonverbal 
joy was unrelated to estimates of allocation strategies. Observers also attributed higher 
scores on the meritocracy items from Studies 1 and 2. With respect to egalitarianism 
items, a significant Actor confidence x Actor joy interaction emerged. A pattern generally 
consistent with our conceptual model emerged: individuals with weaker pride expressions 
were especially likely to be perceived as higher in egalitarianism if they strongly 
expressed joy. Finally, similar to the unanticipated cue validity findings reported above, I 
found that participants were viewed as less likely to engage in a merit-focused allocation 
strategy and more likely to engage in an equality-focused strategy if they had a partner 
who strongly expressed pride.  
 
19 
----------------Discussion 
 
Study 3 revealed a “kernel of truth” in people’s assumptions of the beliefs 
communicated by the nonverbal pride display. Pride provided an accurate signal, at least 
in part, of support for meritocracy to social observers. Individuals who displayed more 
pride while discussing their most positive characteristics were more likely to advocate 
dividing a (fictitious) sum of money between the self and partner on the basis of merit 
instead of equality. Importantly, they did not allocate a greater share of the money to 
themselves than to their partners, suggesting that their support for meritocracy in this 
study was not merely an attempt to justify selfish decisions.  
Furthermore, and consistent with the first two studies, observers who viewed the 
thin slices of emotional behavior estimated that the high-pride expressers would advocate 
meritocracy, rather than egalitarianism, both in the context of the money division task, 
and with respect to general beliefs about how society ought to function. As in Study 1, I 
conclude that these results were not due to the positive valence of the pride expression 
because perceived support for meritocracy was unrelated to level of expressed joy.  
I submit that the social inferences in this study occurred automatically. Using a 
funneled debriefing, I found no evidence that observers were aware of their tendency to 
associate nonverbal pride displays with greater support for meritocracy. None of the thin-
slice observers had noticed a link between nonverbal expressions and their impressions of 
the participants, nor did they detect my interest in investigating the role of emotion 
expression in impression formation. The notion that pride may automatically or 
unconsciously communicate support for meritocracy fits within evolutionary perspectives 
of emotion. These perspectives hold that emotion expressions serve to communicate 
social information in a highly swift, efficient manner. Relevant empirical work shows 
that conscious awareness of an expression is not required to influence a perceiver’s 
interpretation of events, actions or people (Willis & Todorov, 2006; Winkielman, 
Berridge, & Wilbarger, 2005). Moreover, other thin-slicing effects have been found to 
emerge without awareness on the part of the participant (Chaikin, Sigler, & Derlega, 
1974). As well, the nonverbal pride expression is known to automatically activate 
assumptions about the sender’s high status (Shariff & Tracy, 2009). Overall, it seems that 
the pride-based moral inferences of this study occurred automatically. 
Unexpectedly, while holding constant actor nonverbal pride and joy displays, I 
found that participants paired with a high pride-expressing partner were more likely to 
emphasize equality when justifying their monetary allocations. Moreover, observers—
despite having no knowledge of the partner’s expressions—estimated that participants 
would emphasize equality and de-emphasize merit in their justifications if their partner 
had a strong pride expression. In other words, partner expressions independently 
influenced participants’ decisions about how to divide the money. Even more 
interestingly, observers picked up on this information just by watching the actor. It is not 
clear why these patterns emerged, but it is possible that participants’ egalitarian reactions 
to pride-expressing partners may have been leaked to observers through nonverbal cues 
not explored in this study, such as other facial expressions, gaze, posture, or hand 
gestures. These inquiries are worthy of further investigation. 
It is worth seeking to replicate and understand these effects in future 
investigations. 
20 
----------------In sum, Study 3 once again illustrated that social observers are more likely to 
attribute meritocracy beliefs to individuals who express greater pride—but this time these 
patterns were revealed using genuine, dynamic emotion displays that unfolded 
spontaneously during a relevant social interaction. Importantly, Study 3 depicted the 
validity of the pride signal. Participants who expressed greater pride were more likely to 
focus on merit and performance when selecting a fair division of a resource between the 
self and a partner. These results illustrate that people who expressed pride are not only 
perceived as more likely to value meritocracy, they actually are more likely to value 
meritocracy.  
 
VI. General Discussion 
 
Expressions of emotion shape the course of human interactions. They alert current 
and potential relationship partners to feeling states, personality traits and, I suggest, 
beliefs about morality and distributive justice. In particular, the nonverbal pride display is 
theorized to help groups establish social hierarchies, which are necessary for group 
stability and coordination, by clearly signaling individuals who deserve high status.  
Consistent with this function and with appraisal-tendency frameworks, the present 
research demonstrated that nonverbal displays of pride communicate enhanced support 
for meritocracy, which is a hierarchy-enhancing form of resource distribution that 
selectively endows successful, high-achieving individuals with greater access to material 
and social goods. Social observers inferred that a target would be more likely to endorse 
meritocracy if the target appeared proud, rather than joyful or neutral. I found this pattern 
using targets diverse in gender, ethnicity, occupation and familiarity. Furthermore these 
patterns held across different perceptual modalities (static images, thin slices) and 
assessment methods (general beliefs about society, specific allocations between the self 
and partner).  
In Study 1, participants estimated that an unfamiliar target presented in a 
photograph would endorse meritocracy to a greater extent, and egalitarianism to a lesser 
extent, if the target appeared proud. The opposite pattern emerged when targets appeared 
joyful. Study 2 extended these effects to perceptions of President Barack Obama. 
Participants primed with an image of Obama expressing pride were more likely to believe 
that Obama had uttered meritocracy-related statements than participants primed with an 
expressionless image of Obama. Finally, in Study 3, targets who expressed greater pride 
in the context of a mock interview were more likely to exhibit support for meritocracy on 
a money allocation task. They were also viewed by observers as more likely to support 
meritocracy during the money allocation task, and in terms of broader social values that 
would not bear directly on the target. These results portray that observers correctly base 
their assumptions of others’ support for meritocracy on expressions of pride.  
This research presents the first evidence that observers rely on expressions of 
pride to construct their moral impressions of others. However, it cannot speak directly to 
the psychological mechanisms that underlie the phenomenon. I speculate that the 
experience of pride involves both the initiation of a recognizable nonverbal display and 
an increase in social perceptions that promote hierarchy, such as support for meritocracy. 
Observers, perhaps automatically, correctly use the nonverbal display to infer the social 
perceptions. Why would observers implicitly or explicitly know to associate nonverbal 
21 
----------------pride with hierarchy-enhancing beliefs? It may be through personal experience of pride-
based shifts in moral beliefs or through repeated exposure to proud individuals who made 
their hierarchy-enhancing beliefs clearly known (see Tiedens et al., 2001 for similar 
arguments). The present data can neither confirm nor disconfirm this speculation, 
however, and it remains an important task for future research.  
 
Contributions to the Embodiment and Person Perception Literatures 
Findings of the present studies make important contributions to the flourishing 
literatures on embodiment and thin slicing. First, these studies are among the few to 
document emotion specificity in embodiment effects. Past embodiment research has 
predominantly examined the link between expressions of positive versus negative affect 
to different social perceptions (but see Schnall, Benton, & Harvey, 2008 for relevant 
work on embodied disgust and moral judgment). Few studies have explored differences 
between like-valenced emotions, such as pride versus joy. Yet emotions evolved to help 
humans confront the myriad challenges and opportunities afforded by social living. An 
emotion’s unique cognitive elements (appraisals, shifts in judgment) and unique 
embodied elements (nonverbal displays, physiological reactions, neuroendocrine 
responses) enable adaptive behavior given current circumstances (Frijda & Mesquita, 
1994; Keltner & Haidt, 1999). Consequently, we should find positive associations 
between emotion-specific changes in the body and emotion-specific changes in cognition. 
Study 3 found precisely this relationship with respect to pride: stronger displays of pride 
in the body predicted stronger support for meritocracy in a subsequent task.  
In turn, the perception of emotion-specific embodiments, like nonverbal 
expressions, helps interaction partners rapidly interpret traits critical to the negotiation of 
group relations, such as beliefs about resource distribution. Beyond illustrating the values 
associated with the pride expression, I introduce an appraisal-tendency approach to 
understanding thin-slicing and zero-acquaintance effects in impression formation. Just as 
emotion experiences amplify specific moral beliefs (Horberg, Oveis, & Keltner, 2010), so 
too do emotions’ nonverbal cues signal these beliefs to others. This theoretical 
contribution is notable given that previous research on emotion and morality has 
concentrated on the role of emotions in shaping an individual’s own moral judgments. 
Fewer studies have linked the intrapersonal effects of discrete emotions (shifting moral 
beliefs in specific, functional ways) to the interpersonal effects of the emotion (conveying 
those beliefs to others), as these studies have attempted to do.  
Ultimately, this kind of research is poised to reveal the far-reaching moral 
implications of emotion, from understanding how we interpret the actions of others to the 
way we unconsciously shift one another’s moral intuitions—areas of inquiry that have 
been highlighted in theory (e.g., Haidt & Bjorklund, 2008; Haidt & Kesebir, in press) but 
rarely before touched in research.  
 
 
22 
----------------VII. References 
 
Ambady, N., & Rosenthal, R. (1992) Thin slices of expressive behavior as predictors of  
interpersonal consequences: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 111, 256-
274. 
Anderson, N. H. (1968). Likableness ratings of 555 personality-trait words. Journal of \ 
Personality and Social Psychology, 9, 272-279 
Batson, C. D. Klein, T. R., Highberger, L., & Shaw, L. L. (1995) Immorality from 
empathy-induced altruism: When compassion and justice conflict. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 1042-1054. 
Batson, C. D., & Shaw, L. L. (1991). Evidence for altruism: Toward a pluralism of 
prosocial motives. Psychological Inquiry, 2, 107-122. 
Berkowitz, L. (1999). Anger. In T. Dalgleish & M. Power (Eds.), Handbook of cognition  
and emotion (pp. 411–428). Chichester, England and New York: Wiley. 
Borkenau, P. & Liebler, A. (1992). Trait inferences: Sources of validity at zero  
acquaintance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 645-657. 
Brown, W. M., and Moore, C. (2002). Smile asymmetries and reputation as reliable  
indicators of likelihood to cooperate: An evolutionary analysis. Advances in 
Psychology Research, 11, 59-78.  
Brown, Palameta, & Moore, 2002). Are there nonverbal cues to commitment? An  
exploratory study using the zero-acquaintance video presentation paradigm. 
Evolutionary Psychology, 1, 42-69. 
Brunswick, E. (1956). Perception and the Representative Design of Psychological  
Experiments. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
Chaikin, A. L. Sigler, E., & Derlega, V. J. (1974). Nonverbal mediators of teacher  
expectancy effects Source:Journal of personality and social psychology. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 30, 144-149. 
Cheng, J. T., Tracy, J. L., & Henrich, J. (2010). Pride, Personality, and the Evolutionary  
Foundations of Human Social Status. Evolution and Human Behavior, 31, 334-
347. 
Clark, C. (1990). Emotions and the micropolitics in everyday life: Some patterns and  
paradoxes of "place." In T. D. Kemper (Ed.), Research agendas in the sociology 
of emotions (pp. 305-334). Albany: State University of New "fork Press. 
Darwin, C. (1952). The descent of man. Chicago: Encyclopedia Britannica. (Original  
work published 1871). 
Davey, L. M., Bobocel, R., Son Hing, L. S, .& Zanna, M. P. (1999). Preference for the  
merit principle: An individual difference measure of distributive justice. Social 
Justice Research, 12, 223-240. 
de Waal, F. B. M. (1988). The integration of dominance and social bonding in primates.  
The Quarterly Review of Biology, 61, 459-479. 
de Waal, F.B.M. (1996).  Conflict as negotiation.  In W.C. McGrew, L.F. Marchant, &  
T. Nishida (Eds.), Great ape societies (pp. 159-172).  New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
DeSteno, D., Petty, R. E., Rucker, D. D., Wegener, D. T., & Braverman, J. (2004).  
Discrete emotions and persuasion: The role of emotion-induced expectancies. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86, 43-56. 
23 
----------------Deutsch, M. (1975). Equity, equality, and need: What determines which value will be  
used as the basis of distributive justice? Journal of Social Issues, 31, 137-149. 
Deutsch, M. (1985). Distributive Justice:A Social Psychological Perspective. New  
Haven : Yale University Press. 
Eisenberg, N., & Miller, P.A. (1987).  The relation of empathy to prosocial and related  
behaviors.  Psychological Bulletin, 101, 91-119. 
Ellsworth, P. C., & Scherer, K. R. (2003). Appraisal processes in emotion. In R. J.  
Davidson,H.Goldsmith, K. R. Scherer (Eds.), Handbook of the affective sciences 
(pp. 572-595). New York and Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Feinberg, M. R., Willer, R., & Keltner, D. (2010). Flustered and faithful: Embarrassment  
as a signal of prosociality. Manuscript under review. 
Fiske, A. P. (1992). The four elementary forms of sociality: Framework for a unified  
theory of social relations. Psychological Review, 99, 698-723. 
Frank, R. (1988). Passions within reason: The strategic role of the emotions. New York:  
Norton. 
Frijda, N. H., & Mesquita, B. (1994). The social roles and functions of emotions. In S.  
Kitayama and H. R. Markus (Eds.), Emotion and culture: Empirical studies of 
mutual influence (pp. 51-87). Washington, D.C.: American Psychological 
Association.   
Funder, D. C., & Sneed, C. D. (1993). Behavioral manifestation of personality: An  
ecological approach to judgmental accuracy. 
Greene, J. & Haidt, J. (2002). How (and where) does moral judgment work? Trends in  
cognitive science, 6, 517-523. 
Haidt, J. (2001). The emotional dog and its rational tail: A social intuitionist approach to  
moral judgment. Psychological Review, 108, 814-834. 
Haidt, J., & Bjorklund, F. (2008). Social intuitionists answer six questions about moral  
psychology. In W. Sinnott-Armstrong (Ed.), Moral Psychology, Volume 2: The 
Cognitive Science of Morality: Intuition and Diversity. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press. (pp. 181-217). 
Haidt, J., & Graham, J. (2007). When morality opposes justice: Conservatives have moral  
intuitions that liberals may not recognize. Social Justice Research, 20, 98-116. 
Haidt, J., & Joseph, C. (2004). Intuitive ethics. Dædalus, 133, 55-66.  
Haidt, J., & Kesebir, S. (2010). Morality. In S. Fiske, & D. Gilbert (Eds.) Handbook of  
Social Psychology, 5th Edition. 
Han, S., Lerner, J. S., & Keltner, D. (2007). Feelings and consumer decision making: The  
appraisal-tendency framework. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 17, 158-168. 
Hareli, S. & Hess, U. (2010).What emotional reactions can tell us about the nature of  
others: An appraisal perspective on person perception. Cognition and emotion, 24, 
128-140. 
Harker, L. & Keltner, D. (2001). Expressions of positive emotion in women’s college  
yearbook pictures and their relation to personality and life outcomes across 
adulthood. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 112-124.    
Hess, U., Adams, R. B. Jr., & Kleck, R. E. (2008). The role of facial expression in person  
perception. In: N. Ambady & J. J. Skowronski (Eds.) First impressions, pp. 234-
254. Guilford Press. 
Hess, U. Blairy, S., & Kleck, R. E. (2000). The influence of facial emotion displays,  
24 
----------------gender, and ethnicity on judgments of dominance and affiliation. Journal of 
Nonverbal Behavior, 24, 265-283. 
Horberg, Oveis, & Keltner. (in press). Emotions as moral amplifiers: An appraisal- 
tendency approach to the influences of distinct emotions upon moral judgment. 
Emotion Review. 
Horberg, E. J., Oveis, C., Keltner, D., & Cohen, A. B. (2009). Disgust and the   
moralization of purity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97, 963-976. 
Kaul, T. J. & Schmidt, L. D. (1971). Dimensions of interviewer trustworthiness. Journal  
of Counseling Psychology, 18, 542-548. 
Keltner, D. & Buswell, B. N. (1997). Embarrassment: Its distinct form and appeasement  
functions. Psychological Bulletin, 3, 250-270. 
Keltner, D., Ellsworth, P. C., & Edwards, K. (1993). Beyond simple pessimism: Effects 
of sadness and anger on social perception. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 64, 740-752. 
Keltner, D., & Haidt, J. (1999). Social functions of emotions at four levels of analysis. 
Cognition & Emotion, 13, 505-521. 
Keltner, D. Horberg E. J., & Oveis, C. (2006). Emotions as moral intuitions. In J. P.  
Forgas (Ed.), Affect in social thinking and behavior (pp. 161-175). New York: 
Psychology Press. 
Keltner, D., & Kring, A. M. (1998). Emotion, social function, and psychopathology. 
Review of General Psychology, 2, 320-342.  
Keltner, D., & Lerner, J. S. (2010). Emotion. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindsay  
  (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology (5th ed.; pp. 312-347). New York: 
  McGraw Hill. 
Kenny, D. A., Kashy, D. A., & Cook, W. L. (2006). Dyadic data analysis. New York:  
Guilford Press. 
Knutson, B. (1996). Facial expressions of emotion influence interpersonal trait  
inferences. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 20, 165-182. 
Kraus, M. W., & Keltner, D. (2009). Signs of socioeconomic status: A thin-slicing  
approach. Psychological Science, 20, 99-106. 
Lazarus, R. (1991). Emotion and adaptation. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Lerner, J. S., & Keltner, D. (2001). Fear, anger and risk. Journal of Personality and  
Social  Psychology, 81, 146-159. 
Lerner, J. S., & Tiedens, L. Z. (2006). Portrait of the angry decision maker: How  
appraisal tendencies shape anger’s influence on cognition. Journal of Behavioral 
Decision Making, 119, 115-137. 
Marsh, A. A., Ambady, N. & Kleck, R. W. (2005). The effects of fear and anger  
expressions on approach- and avoidance-related behaviors. Emotion, 5, 119-124. 
Naumann, L. P., Vazire, S., Rentfrow, P. J., & Gosling, S. D. (2009). Personality  
judgments based on physical appearance. Personality and Social Psychology  
Bulletin, 35, 1661-1671. 
Niedenthal, P. M. (2007). Embodying emotion. Science, 316, 1002-1005. 
Ortony, A., Clore, G. L., & Collins, A. (1988). The cognitive structure of 
emotions. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Oveis, C., Horberg, E. J., & Keltner, D. (2010). Compassion, pride, and social intuitions  
25 
----------------of self-other similarity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98, 618-
630.  
Plant, E. A., Hyde, J. S., Keltner, D., & Devine P. G. (2000). The gender stereotyping of  
emotions. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 24, 81-92. 
Rasinski, K. A. (1987). What’s fair is fair—or is it? Values differences underlying  
public views about social justice. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 
201-211. 
Reis, H. T., Wilson, I. M., and 8 others. (1990). What is smiling is beautiful and good. 
European Journal of Social Psychology, 20, 259-267. 
Rozin, P., Lowery, L., Imada, S., & Haidt, J. (1999). The CAD triad hypothesis: A  
mapping between three moral emotions (contempt, anger, disgust) and three 
moral codes (community, autonomy, divinity).  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 76, 578-586. 
Schnall, S., Benton, J., & Harvey, S. (2008). With a clean conscience: Cleanliness  
reduces the severity of moral judgments. Psychological Science, 19, 1219-1222. 
Secord, P. F. (1958). Facial features and inference processes in interpersonal perception.  
In R. Taguiri & L. Petrullo (Eds.), Person perception and interpersonal behavior 
(pp. 300-315). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 
Shiota, M. N., Keltner, D., & John, O. P. (2006). Positive emotion dispositions  
differentially associated with Big Five personality and attachment style. Journal 
of Positive Psychology, 1, 61-71. 
Shariff, A. F., & Tracy, J. L. (2009). Knowing who’s boss: Implicit perceptions of status  
from the nonverbal expression of pride. Emotion, 9, 631-639 
Shweder, R. A., Much, N. C., Mahapatra, M., & Park, L. (1997). The “big three” of  
morality (autonomy, community, and divinity), and the “big three” explanations 
of suffering. In A. Brandt & P. Rozin (Eds.), Morality and Health (pp. 119-169). 
New York: Routledge. 
Stepper, S. & Strack, F. (1993). Proprioceptive determinants of emotional and  
  nonemotional feelings. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 211-   
  220. 
Strack, F., Martin, L. L., & Stepper, S. (1988). Inhibiting and facilitating conditions of  
the human smile: A nonobtrusive test of the facial feedback hypothesis. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 768-777. 
Tiedens, L. Z., & Linton, S. (2001). Judgment under emotional certainty and uncertainty: 
The effects of specific emotions on information processing. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 973-988. 
Tiedens, L. Z., Ellsworth, P. C., Mesquita, B. (2000). Sentimental stereotypes: Emotional  
expectations for high- and low-status group members. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 26, 560-575.   
Tracy, J. L. (2010). Pride. In I. Weiner & W. E. Craighead (Eds.), Encyclopedia of  
Psychology (Fourth Edition, pp.1284-1286). New York: John Wiley 
Tracy, J. L., & Matsumoto, D. (2008). The spontaneous expression of pride and shame:  
Evidence for biologically innate nonverbal displays. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 105, 11655-11660. 
Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2004). Putting the self into self-conscious emotions: A  
theoretical model. Psychological Inquiry, 15, 103-125. 
26 
----------------Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2004). Show your pride: Evidence for a discrete emotion  
expression. Psychological Science, 15, 194-197. 
Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2007). The nature of pride. In J. L. Tracy, R. W. Robins,  
& J. P. Tangney (Eds), The self-conscious emotions: Theory and research. New 
York: Guilford. 
Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2008). The nonverbal expression of pride: Evidence for  
cross-cultural recognition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 516-
530.  
Tracy, J. L., Robins, R. W., & Lagattuta, K. H. (2005). Can children recognize the pride  
expression? Emotion, 5, 251-257 
Tracy, J. L., Shariff, A. F., & Cheng, J. T. (2010). A naturalist’s view of pride. Emotion  
Review, 2, 163-177 
Vasquez, K., Keltner, D., Ebenbach, D.H., & Banaszynski, T.L. (2001).  Cultural  
variation and similarity in moral rhetorics: Voices from the Philippines and the 
United States.  Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 32, 93-120. 
Vehrencamp, S.L. (2000). Handicap, index, and conventional signal elements of bird 
song. In Y. Edpmark, T. Amundsen, & G. Rosenquist (Eds.) Animal signals: 
Signaling and signal design in animal communication (pp. 277-300). Trondheim, 
Norway: Tapir Academic Press.  
Verbeke, W., Belschak, F., & Bagozzi, R. P. (2004). The adaptive consequences of pride  
in personal selling. Academic of Marketing Science Journal. 32, 386-402. 
Verplaetse, J., Vanneste, S., & Braeckman, J. (2007). You can judge a book by its cover:  
the sequel.: A kernal of truth in predictice cheating detection. Evolution and 
Human Behavior, 28, 260-271. 
Wagstaff, G. F. (1994). Equity, equality, and need: Three principles of justice or one? An  
analysis of “equity as desert.” Current Psychology, 13, 138-152. 
Walster, E., Berscheid, E, & Walster, G. W. (1971). New directions in equity research.  
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 25, 2, 151-176. 
Weiner, B. (2006). Social motivation, justice, and the moral emotions: An attributional  
approach. Mahwah, N.J: Erlbaum. 
Williams, L. A., & DeSteno, D. (2008). Pride and perseverance: The motivational role of  
pride. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 1007-1017. 
Williams, L. A., & DeSteno, D. (2009). Pride: Adaptive emotion or seventh sin?  
Psychological Science, 20, 284-288. 
Willis, J., & Todorov, A. (2006). First impressions: Making up your mind after 100-ms  
exposure to a face. Psychological Science, 17, 7, 592-598. 
Winkielman, P. & Berridge, K. C. (2004). Unconscious emotion. Current Directions in  
Psychological Science, 13, 120-123.  
Winkielman, P., Berridge, K. C., & Wilbarger, J. L. (2005). Unconscious affective  
reactions to masked happy versus angry faces influence consumption behavior 
and judgments of value. 
Zebrowitz, L. & Montpare, J. M. (2008). Social psychological face perceptions: Why  
appearance matters. Social Personality and Social Psychology Compass, 2, 1497-
1517. 
 Zebrowitz, Leslie A., & Montepare, J.M. (2008). First Impressions from Facial  
27 
----------------Appearance Cues.  In  N. Ambady & J. Skowronski (Eds.). First Impressions (pp. 
171-204). New York: Guilford Publications, Inc. 
 
28 
----------------VIII. Footnotes 
 
1 Images of one of the male targets came from the UC Davis Set of Emotion 
Expressions (http://ubc-emotionlab.ca/research/#Ucdavis).  
 
2 For all studies, no results changed when controlling for participant gender or 
ethnicity. 
 
3 Aspects of the experimental procedure are described in Kraus and Keltner 
(2009). Some demographic data reported here are published in the same article. No other 
data or analyses from this study are published. 
29 
----------------IX. Appendix 
 
Sample Images of Nonverbal Displays of Joy and Pride used in Study 1 
 
        
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
----------------Target Images of Neutrality and Pride used in Study 2 
 
           
 
31 
----------------Meritocracy and Egalitarian Items used in Study 1 
 
Meritocracy items 
 
1. Scholarships should be based more on merit than on need. 
2. It is okay for some people to have better lives if they earned it. 
3. Society should be structured so that people who are successful, competent or 
accomplished gain social status and power. 
4. It is to everyone's benefit--not just some people's benefit--that highly capable people 
have more power and influence  than less capable people. 
 
 
Egalitarian items 
 
1. Society should provide resources and services free-of-charge to people who cannot 
afford them. 
2. People who earn larger incomes should pay higher taxes than people with smaller 
incomes. 
3. There is never a time when it’s okay for some people to get more than others, no 
matter what they have accomplished. 
4. It is important to treat all individuals as equals, no matter who they are. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
----------------Meritocracy, Egalitarian and Real Quotes used in Study 2 
 
Meritocracy Quotes 
 
1. “I stand by what I said. It is absolutely the ethical course of action…that [college] 
scholarships should be based more on merit than on need.”  
2. “I believe I’ve been very clear [about my position]. Society should be structured so 
that people who are successful, competent or accomplished gain social status and 
power.”  
3. “It is to everyone's benefit---not just some people's benefit---that the highly capable 
person has more power and influence  than the less capable person.”  
 
Egalitarian Quotes 
 
1. “This country should provide resources and services free-of-charge to people who 
cannot afford them. Period.”  
2. “It’s a simple matter of right and wrong. People who earn larger incomes should pay 
higher taxes than people with smaller incomes.”  
3. “There is never a time when it’s okay for some people to get more than others…no 
matter what they have accomplished.” 
4. “Senator, what you’re saying is that it’s okay for some people to have better lives if 
they earned it. What I’m saying is that this is wrong, and it has to stop.”  
5. “We must treat all individuals equally, no matter who they are.” 
 
Real Quotes 
 
1. "Americans... still believe in an America where anything's possible - they just don't 
think their leaders do." 
2. "The thing about hip-hop today is it's smart, it's insightful. The way they can 
communicate a complex message in a very short space is remarkable." 
3. "Contrary to the rumors you have heard, I was not born in a manger. I was actually 
born on Krypton and sent here by my father Jor-El to save the Planet Earth."  
4. "We can't drive our SUVs and eat as much as we want and keep our homes on 72 
degrees at all times... and then just expect that other countries are going to say OK. That's 
not leadership. That's not going to happen." 
5. "I know my country has not perfected itself. At times, we've struggled to keep the 
promise of liberty and equality for all of our people. We've made our share of mistakes, 
and there are times when our actions around the world have not lived up to our best 
intentions." 
6. "If I had to name my greatest strength, I guess it would be my humility. Greatest 
weakness, it's possible that I'm a little too awesome."  
 
 
 
33 
----------------X. Tables and Figures 
 
Table 1. Relationship of Nonverbal Expressions to Allocation Strategies (Study 3) 
 
  Allocation Strategy 
     
Merit-focused  Equality-focused 
Actor Pride     
β  .16*  -.13 
SE β  .07  .08 
t  2.13  1.60 
Actor Joy     
β  -.11  .02 
SE β  .08  .10 
t  1.30  .23 
Partner Pride     
β  -.04  .19* 
SE β  .07  .08 
t  .50  2.92 
Partner Joy     
β  -.07  .15 
SE β  .08  .09 
t  .96  1.71 
Actor Pride x Actor Joy     
β  .10  -.07 
SE β  .07  .08 
t  1.41  .97 
Gender     
β  -.07  -.01 
SE β  .07  .08 
t  .94  .11 
Note: Gender is coded -1 (Women) and 1 (Men); *p < .05 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
----------------Table 2. Relationship of Nonverbal Expressions to Observer Estimates of Allocation 
Strategies, Meritocracy and Egalitarian Values (Study 3) 
 
     
Observer estimates  Observer estimates on 
of Allocation Strategies  Meritocracy and Egalitarianism 
scales 
  Merit- Equality- Meritocracy  Egalitarian 
focused  focused  scale  scale 
Actor Pride         
β  .34*  -.14*  .11*  -.05 
SE β  .08  .06  .05  .04 
t  4.15  2.15  2.34  -1.50 
Actor Joy         
β  -.03  -.05  -.07  .03 
SE β  .10  .08  .06  .04 
t  .34  .68  1.23  .50 
Partner Pride         
β  -.17*  .13*  .02  .07 
SE β  .08  .06  .04  .04 
t  2.22  2.20  .50  1.96 
Partner Joy         
β  -.05  -.08  -.05  -.01 
SE β  .08  .06  .05  .04 
t  .56  1.17  -1.01  .21 
Actor Pride x Actor         
Joy         
β  -.01  .08  .04  -.09* 
SE β  .09  .07  .05  .04 
t  .13  1.26  .82  2.42 
Gender         
β  .18*  -.07  .10  -.16* 
SE β  .08  .06  .05  .08 
t  2.19  1.15  2.08  2.37 
Target Liking         
β  -.06  .14*  -.06  .08* 
SE β  .08  .06  .04  .04 
t  .80  2.33  1.50  2.37 
Note: Gender is coded -1 (Women) and 1 (Men); *p < .05 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
----------------Figure 1. Effects of Pride and Joy Displays on Targets’ Values (Study 1) 
 
s 3.9
e
u
l
a 3.7
v
 
'
s
t
e 3.5
g
r
a
t
f  3.3 Pride expression
o
 
n Joy expression
o
i 3.1
t
p
e
c
r 2.9
e
p
 
n
a 2.7
e
M
2.5
Meritocracy  Egalitarian
Target Values
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36 
----------------Figure 2. Effects of Obama Expression on Perceptions of Obama’s values (Study 2) 
 
6
s
e
u
al 5.5
v
 
s
'
a
m 5
a
b
O
Pride
 
of 4.5
  Neutral
n
o
i
t
p 4
e
c
r
e
p
  3.5
n
a
e
M
3
Meritocracy  Egalitarian
Obama values
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37 
----------------Figure 3. Observer Estimates of Target Participants' Egalitarianism as a Function of the 
Strength of Nonverbal Pride and Joy Expressions (Study 3) 
 
4.9
s 4.8
e
u
l
a
v
n  4.7
a
i
r
a
t Low pride
li 4.6
a
g High pride
E
 
d
e 4.5
t
a
m
i
t
s 4.4
E
4.3
Low  High
Joy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 
----------------