UC Berkeley
UC Berkeley Electronic Theses and Dissertations
Title
Essays in Empirical Macroeconomics
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0wh0h5bj
Author
Nelson Mondragon, John Alexander
Publication Date
2015
 
Peer reviewed|Thesis/dissertation
eScholarship.org Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California
----------------Essays in Empirical Macroeconomics
by
John Alexander Nelson Mondragon
A dissertation submitted in partial satisfaction of the
requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
in
Economics
in the
Graduate Division
of the
University of California, Berkeley
Committee in charge:
Professor Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Chair
Professor Christina D. Romer
Professor Demian Gaston Pouzo
Professor James A. Wilcox
Spring 2015
----------------Essays in Empirical Macroeconomics
Copyright 2015
by
John Alexander Nelson Mondragon
----------------1
Abstract
Essays in Empirical Macroeconomics
by
John Alexander Nelson Mondragon
Doctor of Philosophy in Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Professor Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Chair
This dissertation provides evidence on the eﬀects of changes in the supply of credit to house-
holds during the 2000s on employment and other outcomes of interest during the 2000s. In
the ﬁrst chapter I study the eﬀects of contractions in household credit supply during the
ﬁnancial crisis of 2007-2009. I exploit a county’s exposure to the collapse of a large and
previously healthy lender as a natural experiment. I show that exposure to this shock ap-
pears to be uncorrelated with other important shocks at the time. Reduced form estimates
suggest that this shock had large eﬀects on the ﬂow of credit, housing and non-housing
expenditures, and employment. Using exposure to this shock as an instrument gives an
estimated elasticity of employment with respect to household credit of about 0.3, caused by
declines in both housing and non-housing demand. In the second chapter I study the size of
the credit supply shock using non-parametric methods. I identify lender-speciﬁc supply-side
shocks, which I then aggregate into a simple measure of credit supply shocks to counties. I
provide conditions under which this measured shock can be used to quantify the importance
of supply shocks to credit in both the cross-section and, in a partial equilibrium sense, the
aggregate. Combining this measure with various estimates of the elasticity of employment
with respect to the measure, I calculate that shocks to household credit can be responsible
for 30 to 60% of the decline in employment from 2007 to 2010.
----------------i
To My Parents
----------------ii
Contents
Contents ii
List of Figures iii
List of Tables iv
1 Household Credit and Real Eﬀects of the Financial Crisis 1
1.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.2 Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.3 Econometric Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
1.4 Data, Sample, and Summary Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
1.5 Wachovia and the “Deal from Hell” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.6 Loan-Level Evidence that Wachovia Contracted Credit to Households . . . . 12
1.7 Spatial Frictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
1.8 Exclusion Restriction, First Stage, and Reduced Form . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
1.9 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
2 Accounting for Shocks to the Household Credit Market 53
2.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
2.2 Measuring the Aggregate Direct Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
2.3 Constructing and Using a Measure of Credit Shocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
2.4 Estimates of Lender Shocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
2.5 Measured Area Shock and Instrumental Variable Estimation . . . . . . . . . 66
2.6 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
References 78
A 84
A.1 An Explicit Example and Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
A.2 Identiﬁcation Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
----------------iii
List of Figures
1.1 Aggregate Credit Flows Normalized to 2005 Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
1.2 Nonfarm Employment and House Prices Normalized to January 2005 Level . . . 25
1.3 Distribution of Average of Wachovia Share of Home Mortgage Lending in 2005-2006 26
1.4 Wachovia’s Collapse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
1.5 Wachovia and Origination Probabilities: Diﬀerence Within County and Income
Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
1.6 Wachovia and Log LTI and Log Income on Originated Home Purchase Loans: . 29
1.7 Wachovia’sShareofCensusTractOriginationsin2007andDistancefromNearest
Wachovia Branch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
1.8 Census Tract Household Credit Growth and Distance from Nearest Wachovia
Branch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
1.9 Exposure to Wachovia and Trends in Household Credit, Non-tradable Employ-
ment, and House Prices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
1.10 Eﬀect of Exposure to Wachovia on Household Credit Growth . . . . . . . . . . . 33
1.11 Wachovia and Household Credit Growth 2007-2010 in Large Counties, Semipara-
metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
1.12 Wachovia and Employment Growth 2007-2010 in Large Counties, Semiparametric 35
1.13 Household and Firm Credit from Wachovia and Market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
2.1 Checking the Stability of Lender Fixed Eﬀects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
2.2 Distribution of Measured Shocks in the South and East . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
2.3 Eﬀect of Exposure to Wachovia on the Measured Shock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
2.4 Simulated Measured and True Shocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
----------------iv
List of Tables
1.1 Summary Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
1.2 Summary Statistics - East and South . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
1.3 Joint Correlation Between Wachovia Exposure and Observables . . . . . . . . . 38
1.4 Eﬀect of Exposure to Wachovia on Home Purchase and Reﬁnance Credit Growth
2007-2010 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
1.5 Eﬀect of Wachovia Exposure on Retail Expenditures, House Sales, and House
Prices 2007-2010 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
1.6 Eﬀect of Wachovia Exposure on Nontradable Employment and Payroll 2007-2010 41
1.7 Eﬀect of Wachovia Exposure on Construction Employment and Payroll 2007-2010 42
1.8 Eﬀect of Wachovia Exposure on Nonresidential Construction Employment and
Payroll 2007-2010 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
1.9 Eﬀect of Wachovia Exposure on Residential Construction Employment and Pay-
roll 2007-2010 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
1.10 Eﬀect of Wachovia Exposure on Tradables Employment and Payroll 2007-2010 . 45
1.11 Eﬀect of Wachovia Exposure on Employment and Payroll Excluding Tradables
2007-2010 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
1.12 Eﬀect of Wachovia Exposure on Total Employment and Payroll 2007-2010 . . . 47
1.13 Wachovia Exposure in the Household and Firm Credit Market 2007-2010 . . . . 48
1.14 Which Type of Credit Matters for Employment Growth 2007-2010 . . . . . . . . 49
1.15 Wachovia Exposure and Establishment Growth by Size 2007-2010 . . . . . . . . 50
1.16 EﬀectofSupply-drivenChangesinHouseholdCreditonTotalEmploymentGrowth
2007-2010 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
1.17 EﬀectofSupply-drivenChangesinHouseholdCreditonTotalEmploymentGrowth
2007-2010, Heterogeneity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
2.1 Lender Regulator Proportions in Total HMDA Data and Estimation Sample . . 75
2.2 Eﬀect of Exposure to Wachovia on the Measured Shock (First Stage) . . . . . . 76
2.3 Eﬀect of Measured Shock on Employment 2007-2010 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
2.4 Aggregate Direct Contribution of Shocks to Household Credit 2007-2010 (%
Change) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
----------------v
Acknowledgments
My list of debts is long and the deﬁcits are deep. I will be forever grateful to my advisor
Yuriy Gorodnichenko. He is constantly generous, patient, forgiving, and understanding. His
work, as an advisor, economist, and person, will always be a model for me to strive towards.
Christina Romer and David Romer have been equally formative. I learned from both of them
the importance of pushing myself to work on important, empirically-grounded work. In an
ﬁeld where it is so easy to become cynical and “play the game” their determined sincerity to
do good, important work has been inspiring and bolstering. Finally, it is diﬃcult for me to
imagine this work without the incredible support and perspective of Amir Kermani. He was
constantly pushing me to do more and better and he was selﬂess with his time to make sure
that it happened. I am also grateful for the support and advice of James Wilcox, Demian
Pouzo, Marianna Kudlyak, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Martha Olney.
I was also incredibly lucky for my peers and oﬃce mates. I learned by conversing with
and listening to an illustrious list: Mu-Jeung Yang, Joshua Hausman, Johannes Weiland,
Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, and Lorenz Keung. Their deep thoughtfulness will forever impress
me.
Finally, I owe everything to my family. I do not know where I would be without their
love.
Any remaining mistakes and limitations are my own.
----------------1
Chapter 1
Household Credit and Real Eﬀects of
the Financial Crisis
1.1 Introduction
U.S.employmentfellbyover7%from2007to2010,butthereissubstantialuncertaintyabout
what caused this decline. One potentially important shock to the economy over this period
was the contraction in the supply of credit to households caused by distress in the ﬁnancial
sector. Insofar as household demand for output responded to changes in the supply of credit
and output was aﬀected by changes in household demand, then shocks to the supply of credit
to households may have aﬀected output and employment. The size of the household credit
market suggests this channel has the potential to be very large. In 2006 households extracted
almost $900 billion of home equity with this quantity falling to essentially zero during the
crisis.1 However, there is relatively little evidence on how strongly household expenditures
and employment responded to disruptions in household credit during the recession. I use
a natural experiment to study the eﬀects of contractions in household credit supply across
counties on various outcomes of interest. I ﬁnd that these shocks caused large declines in
both housing and non-housing expenditures and that this resulted in signiﬁcant declines
in employment with losses concentrated in residential construction and non-tradables. My
estimates suggest that a 10% decline in the ﬂow of household credit due to supply shocks
would cause a 3% decline in total employment. Given that household credit declined by
about 40% over this period this suggests that shocks to the supply of household credit were
potentially critical drivers of the recession.
I rely on variation across across U.S. counties to estimate quantities of interest. To
ensure that this variation is exogenous, I exploit the collapse of Wachovia, a large and
healthy lender before the crisis. In mid-2006, Wachovia purchased the mortgage lender
1EstimatesprovidedbyJimKennedyofthemortgagesystempresentedin“EstimatesofHomeMortgage
Originations, Repayments, and Debt On One-to-Four Family Residences,” Alan Greenspan and Kames
Kennedy, Federal Reserve Board FEDS working paper no. 2005-41.
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 2
Golden West Financial to expand its market share in the West and to take advantage of
Golden West’s expertise in non-traditional mortgages. Golden West was a very large lender
heavily concentrated in areas experiencing a collapse in house prices and specializing in loans
with a high default risk. Wachovia rapidly began experiencing large losses on Golden West’s
portfolio of high-risk mortgages. Along with the market-wide collapse in liquidity, the losses
from Golden West resulted in Wachovia’s distressed sale to Wells Fargo in December 2008.
I show that this distress resulted in Wachovia signiﬁcantly contracting its supply of credit
to households. Using detailed mortgage application data that allow me to observe the ﬂow
of household credit from lenders to counties, I show that during Wachovia’s distress and
even after its sale, Wachovia signiﬁcantly contracted household access to credit across its
traditional areas of operation, the South and the East. High-income applicants to Wachovia
were 20 percentage points less likely to get a loan relative to similar applicants at non-
Wachovia lenders within the same county. Wachovia’s declines in origination probabilities
for low- and middle-income applicants were over twice as large. Similarly, applicants who
did receive loans received smaller loans relative to other lenders in the area. Before and after
the crisis, Wachovia’s origination behavior was indistinguishable from the average lender,
consistent with these origination patterns being caused by the crisis.
The decline in credit from Wachovia was large, but for variation from a single lender
to be informative about aggregate credit supply shocks it must be the case that there are
frictions that limit the elasticity of substitution across lenders. Thus, if lender A contracts
credit by more than lender B, then counties more dependent on lender A will suﬀer a larger
credit contraction than counties more dependent on lender B. My estimates are functions
of these frictions and so are informative about their relative strength in this period. But
while limited substitution across lenders is well-documented in the ﬁrm credit market, there
is less evidence on this elasticity in the household credit market. I provide direct evidence
that these frictions are important in the household credit market. I ﬁnd that Wachovia
has a signiﬁcantly higher market share in census tracts nearer to a Wachovia branch, even
when comparing census tracts all within ﬁve miles of a branch. Consistent with this spatial
pattern of market share, census tracts less than a mile away from a Wachovia branch had
signiﬁcantly lower mortgage growth from 2007 to 2010 relative to census tracts three to
four miles away. Prior to the recession, these census tracts had similar trends in mortgage
growth no signiﬁcant selective placement of Wachovia branches across census tracts. This
shows that spatial frictions were one of several potential frictions limiting the substitution
of households away from the Wachovia shock.
Within counties in Wachovia’s traditional markets, I ﬁnd that an increase in Wachovia’s
market share of home purchase and reﬁnance credit resulted in large and robust declines in
household credit from 2007 to 2010. This reﬂects a direct decline in lending from Wachovia
as well as indirect local equilibrium eﬀects such as the resulting changes in house prices
and income. Exposure to Wachovia in the household credit market also led to declines
in retail expenditures, the number of house sales, and, to a lesser extent, declines in house
prices. ResidentialconstructionemploymentrespondedmoststronglytoWachoviaexposure,
followed by non-tradable employment, such as restaurant services. There was no signiﬁcant
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 3
eﬀect on tradable employment, consistent with these eﬀects being driven by declines in
household demand.
Distinguishing between the ﬁrm and household credit supply channels is critical. I ﬁrst
document that Wachovia’s fall in lending to households was exceptional relative to other
lendersinthemarket,whileintheﬁrmmarketWachovia’scontractionwasstrikinglyaverage.
This suggests that exposure to Wachovia in the cross-section will primarily reﬂect variation
in the supply of household credit. I check this relationship using cross-secitonal measures
of Wachovia’s importance in the ﬁrm credit market. While exposure to Wachovia in the
ﬁrm and household credit markets is very correlated, there is useful variation between the
two. Using this variation, I ﬁnd that counties where more ﬁrms borrowed from Wachovia
did have larger declines in ﬁrm credit even after exposure to Wachovia in the household
credit market is taken into account. But Wachovia’s role in the ﬁrm credit market had no
eﬀect on household credit, consumption, or any type of employment, except possibly in the
nonresidential construction market. Together, these results indicate that the real eﬀects of
exposure to Wachovia were the result of Wachovia’s role in the household credit market.
I also show that exposure to Wachovia is not correlated with common alternative expla-
nations for the decline in employment. In particular, exposure to Wachovia is not standing
in for household leverage, house price growth before the crisis, exposure to Golden West,
subprime lending, trade shocks, and labor demand shocks from the real estate, ﬁnance, and
constructionsectors. Infurthersupportoftheexclusionrestriction, Wachovia’smarketshare
was very stable across the 2000s and therefore unlikely to reﬂect selection based on house
price or household debt dynamics. To summarize, exposure to Wachovia appears to be a
shock to household credit that was orthogonal to other local factors.
Using a county’s exposure to Wachovia as an instrument for household credit supply
gives the elasticity of employment to supply-driven changes in household credit of 0.3 re-
ported above. To the best of my knowledge, these are the ﬁrst estimates of the eﬀects of
supply shocks to household credit on employment during the Great Recession. Given that
household credit declined by over 40% during the Great Recession, the household credit
channel’s contribution to employment losses is potentially very large. This is important for
a number of reasons. First, it suggests that household demand was an important driver of
the recession so that policies to sustain or replace the fall in household demand would have
been useful. Second, these results indicate that a large reason household demand fell was
due to disruptions in the ﬁnancial sector caused by the ﬁnancial crisis. So to the extent that
policy might have avoided or alleviated the distress in the ﬁnancial sector and subsequent
contraction in household credit supply a substantial portion of the fall in household demand
might have been prevented.
1.2 Literature Review
Much of the focus on understanding the Great Recession has emphasized the collapse in
house prices and household net worth, which are thought to have caused a fall in household
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 4
demand and so reduced employment. Mian and Suﬁ (2014) and Mian et al. (2013) provide
seminal empirical evidence on the eﬀects of changes in net worth on household consumption
and employment. Mian et al. (2013) show that changes in household net worth induce
large changes in household expenditures. Mian and Suﬁ (2014) show that these changes in
household net worth also induce changes in employment and that the decline in net worth
can explain as much as 40% of the observed decline in employment. Gropp et al. (2014)
also emphasize the local decline in house prices, but focus on its eﬀects on the supply of
household credit. They argue that the collapse in house prices caused local lenders to reduce
the supply of credit even to renters, who did not experience a decline in wealth. This body
of work is distinct from my work as the eﬀects that I identify are not caused by changes in
local observables, but instead reﬂect shocks from ﬁnancial intermediaries that are orthogonal
to local conditions.
Another strain of literature emphasizes that the ﬁnancial crisis reduced the supply of
credit to ﬁrms who then reduced investment and employment. Ivashina and Scharfstein
(2010) document that banks did contract their supply of credit signiﬁcantly during the crisis.
Almeida et al. (2009) and Campello et al. (2010) show that contractions in credit to ﬁrms
aﬀected ﬁrm outcomes including investment and employment. Chodorow-Reich (2014) and
Greenstone et al. (2012) provide additional estimates of the eﬀect of credit supply shocks
on ﬁrm outcomes during the crisis in addition to providing partial equilibrium estimates
of the size of the ﬁrm credit channel. Chodorow-Reich (2014) relies on variation from the
syndicated loan market and ﬁnds large eﬀects with as much as 40% of the observed decline in
employment being attributable to declines in lending. Greenstone et al. (2012) uses variation
from the small business credit market and ﬁnds very small eﬀects. They calculate an upper
bound of the contribution of credit shocks to small businesses responsible for at most 12%
of the observed employment decline.
Much of the theoretical modeling of the Great Recession uses a decline in the supply of
credit to households as a primary shock in generating outcomes reminiscent of the Great
Recession. This is driven in part by the emphasis in the empirical importance of household
leverage and the fact that interest rates have fallen to zero. This second fact is highly
indicative of a reduced form “discount” factor shock, often explicitly modeled as contraction
in credit supply to consumers. Along these lines, Eggertsson and Krugman (2012) model a
reduction in aggregate demand caused by changes in indebted agents’ borrowing constraints.
Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011) use a non-linear model and so emphasize that changes in
borrowing constraints aﬀect precautionary motives that can induce large declines in real
output. Midrigan and Philippon (2011) highlight the role of liquidity shocks to households
in a model that is explicitly cross-sectional. The previous models rely on nominal rigidities in
order to generate declines in real output, Huo and R´ıos-Rull (2013) and Kaplan and Menzio
(2013) show that demand shocks combined with search frictions in goods markets can also
result in real output declines where ? also consider a fall in demand resulting from a decline
in household credit supply. Together, these papers argue that shocks to household credit
supply can generate signiﬁcant shortfalls in household demand, which in turn can result in
declines in real output.
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 5
In spite of this emphasis in the theoretical literature, there has been relatively little
empirical evidence on how strongly employment and household expenditures responded to
supply-driven declines in household credit. Recent empirical work on the contraction in
credit supply to households in the Great Recession includes Dagher and Kazimov (2012) and
Ramcharan et al. (2012). However, these papers do not provide evidence on the employment
eﬀects or attempt to estimate the size of the supply-side shock itself. Kermani (2012) and
DiMaggio and Kermani (2014) are closely related to my work as they provide evidence on
the employment eﬀects of increases in the supply of household credit in the years prior to
the recession.
Because the implicaiton of this work is that household consumption depends signiﬁcantly
ontheprovision(ortheexpectedprovision)ofhouseholdcredit,myworkisalsorelatedtothe
largeliteratureonthedeterminantsofconsumption. Morenarrowly,Cooper(2013)ﬁndsthat
changes in household wealth increase household consumption primarily through a change in
the value of collateral and that those households aﬀected increase consumption signiﬁcantly.
Hurst and Staﬀord (2004) ﬁnd that households likely to be liquidity constrained are more
likely to reﬁnance and extract equity, when they do, they spend signiﬁcant fractions of the
extracted equity on current consumption. Recent work by Violante et al. (2014) ﬁnds that
the fraction of hand-to-mouth consumers, whose consumption is very sensitive to changes
in the supply of credit, is signiﬁcant once the share of wealthy hand-to-mouth households
is taken into account. Baker (2013) ﬁnds that households likely to be nearer to borrower
constraints have a signiﬁcantly higher marginal propensity to consume and that the share of
constrained households was large enough to signiﬁcantly deepen the severity of the recession.
Inadditiontoprovidingexogenousvariationincreditsupplytohouseholds, theWachovia
natural experiment contributes to our understanding of the eﬀects of bank failures and the
policy responses to bank failures. Ashcraft (2005) studies cases when the FDIC forced the
failure of relatively healthy banks and ﬁnds that they have signiﬁcant and long-lasting eﬀects
on local outcomes, although there the focus is on the provision of ﬁrm credit. Giannetti and
Simonov (2013) study policy responses to fails, speciﬁcally capital injections, and ﬁnd that
largepolicyresponsescanhavebeneﬁcialeﬀectswhilecapitalinjectsthataretoosmallmight
not increase the supply of credit and may even contribute to poorer lending standards. This
is related to my work as even though Wachovia was purchased by a relatively well-capitalized
bank in an organized sale, the purchase did not prevent a deep contraction in credit that
had real eﬀects on the local economy.
1.3 Econometric Framework
In this section I build a simple econometric framework to guide my empirical work. I then
discuss how, only using credit quantities and an instrumental variable, we can recover an
elasticity that is informative about the true elasticity of interest and that can be used to
discipline structural models. However, the recovered elasticity is not enough to construct
the accounting object of interest. I then show that with a measure of the shock to credit
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 6
and an instrumental variable (in practice, the same instrumental variable), I can calculate
the accounting quantity of interest.
TheeconomyiscomposedofI areasindexedbyi. Eachareahassomeoutcomeofinterest
E , which I take to be employment. Employment is given by a function E of the price of
i
household credit in the area r , the prices of credit in other areas r , and all other factors (cid:15) ,
i j i
which I assume is a scalar for simplicity. The reduced form solution for the price of credit in
i is a function of supply-side factors in the area S , demand factors D , and other shocks so
i i
that r = R(S ,D ,vr), where vr contains other factors. Finally, the prices of credit in other
i i i i
areas aﬀect employment in i through spillovers, which are summarized by the functions g
i
so that
E = E(R(S ,D ,vr), g ({R(S ,D ,vr)} ), (cid:15) ).
i i i i i j j j j(cid:54)=i i
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
priceini pricesinotherareas
For simplicity, I assume all functions are log linear where X(cid:98) signiﬁes the log deviation of
variable X and βZX is the elasticity of Z with respect to X. I place all terms unrelated to
supply-side shocks in the residual v
(cid:88)
E(cid:98) = βES S(cid:98) + βESS(cid:98) +v .
i i ij j i
(cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125)
j(cid:54)=i
localdirecteﬀect
I call the elasticity βES the local direct eﬀect of supply-side shocks to credit. This elasticity
tells us the total eﬀect, including local general equilibrium eﬀects, of the local supply-side
shock to credit on the outcome of interest at the area. This quantity is of direct interest as it
tells us the direct, ﬁrst order eﬀects that supply-side shocks have on the outcome of interest.
A very small elasticity would require a very large shock for the aggregate direct contribution
to be large and so would likely mean that this channel is unimportant. Additionally, it is
a useful moment for the calibration of structural models. The ideal approach to learning
about βES would be to use data on E(cid:98) and S(cid:98) and then estimate βES, but the true shocks are
i i
not observed. Here I show that I can still recover useful information about βES so long as
I observe another variable that is related to S(cid:98). Consider the reduced form solution for the
i
quantity of credit, which is a function of supply shocks, demand shocks, and other factors
L(cid:98) = βLSS(cid:98) +βLDD(cid:98) +vL.
i i i i
This relationship is helpful because it relates credit quantities, which we are likely to observe,
to the true shock S(cid:98), which is unobserved. I can now use the estimation equation
i
E(cid:98) = γL(cid:98) +e
i i i
asawaytorelatesupply-sideshockstoemployment. Directestimatesofγ, forexampleusing
OLS, will include the eﬀects of demand shocks as well as any other correlation between the
residuals vL and v. Therefore I require an instrumental variable. Let v˜ = (cid:80) βESS(cid:98) +v .
i j(cid:54)=i ij j i
Then a valid instrument is a variable Z that is correlated with changes in supply-side
i
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 7
shocks to credit Cov(Z ,S(cid:98)) (cid:54)= 0, and that satisﬁes the exclusion restrictions Cov(Z ,D(cid:98) ) =
i i i i
Cov(Z ,v˜) = Cov(Z ,vL) = 0. Under these assumptions, it is simple to see that
i i i i
Cov(E(cid:99),Z ) βES
i i
= .
Cov(L(cid:98),Z ) βLS
i i
This quantity is the ratio of the elasticity of employment with respect to credit supply shocks
totheelasticityofcreditquantitieswithrespecttocreditsupplyshocks. Inadditiontotelling
us about the responsiveness of employment relative to the responsiveness of credit quantities,
the ratio is useful for the calibration of structural models or simple hypothetical exercises.
For example, if we believe L(cid:98)∗ is the decline in observed credit due to contractions in credit
supply then βES ×L(cid:98)∗ = E(cid:98)∗, or the direct percentage change in employment resulting from
βLS
contractions in credit supply to households. Of course, the left-hand side implies I use the
IV estimator so that γ converges in probability to βES/βLS under standard assumptions. In
(cid:98)
this chapter I work to identify a valid instrument and recover this ratio of elasticities.
1.4 Data, Sample, and Summary Statistics
I rely on U.S. counties as my primary unit of observation. In addition to conforming with
much of the prior literature, a wealth of reliable data are collected at the county level, which
allows for a broad set of controls. While there are a large number of zipcodes, which would
help precision, many of the important controls are not available at the zip level and many
zip-level measures suﬀer from signiﬁcant measurement error. Additionally, zipcodes can be
so small that a household’s zipcodes of employment, residence, and consumption are often all
diﬀerent, which introduces substantial noise. However, counties are not necessarily natural
economic units of observation so that I also check my central results by aggregating to the
Economics Research Service commuting zone level or restricting the sample to only large
counties. These exercises are actually very similar and result in very similar results.
The data I use to measure household credit are from the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
(HMDA), an application-level database constructed by the Federal Financial Institutions
Examination Council (FFIEC) from disclosure reports submitted by mortgage lenders.2 See
Averyetal.(2007)forausefuldiscussion. Thereportingrequirementsincludelocationofop-
eration as well as asset and origination thresholds that have varied across years. Dell’Ariccia
et al. (2012) estimate the HMDA data cover between 77% and 95% of all mortgage orig-
inations from 2000 to 2006. I rely on the ﬂow of non-reﬁnance mortgages as my primary
measure of household credit. While only a part of total household credit, mortgages are by
far the largest component of most households’ liabilities. In 2008 housing debt was roughly
$10 trillion dollars while non-housing debt was about $2.6 trillion. See the New York Federal
Reserve Bank’s Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit. These data include vari-
ous characteristics of the loan and applicant including the loan amount, applicant income,
2http://www.ffiec.gov/hmda/hmdaproducts.htm.
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 8
origination decision (for example, denied, approved but not originated, originated), census
tract of the property for which the loan will be used, and an identiﬁer for the originator or
purchaser of the loan. The HMDA identiﬁer does not necessarily reﬂect the ultimate entity
operating an institution (for example, bank holding company) nor does it track mergers and
acquisitions of lenders. I adjust for parents and acquisitions using the “Avery” ﬁle.3 The
public data are available at an annual frequency from 1991 to 2013.
I rely on data from the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) to measure and control for
ﬁrm credit. These data are also compiled by the FFIEC from disclosure reports.4 The CRA
reporting thresholds are diﬀerent from those in the HMDA and so do not cover the same
set of lenders, although there is signiﬁcant overlap. The data report measures of lending to
small businesses at the county or census tract level depending on the deﬁnition used. The
ﬁrst measure deﬁnes small business credit as loans to businesses with revenue less than $1
million. The second measure deﬁnes small business loans as any loan for less than $1 million
to a business. Greenstoneet al. (2012) estimate that CRA-lenders originated 86%ofall loans
under $1 million dollars and that the second deﬁnition covers about twice as much (30%) of
total small business originations as the revenue-based measure. Because the coverage of the
market is broader with the loan-size deﬁnition, I use this to measure ﬁrm credit ﬂows.
Imeasure employment with theCountyBusiness Patterns (CBP)dataset, whichcontains
annual observations on employment and payrolls by 4-digit NAICS identiﬁer and size con-
structed from various administrative data from the universe of ﬁrms in the Census Bureau’s
Business Register.5 To separate ﬁrms into tradable, non-tradable, and construction indus-
tries I follow the classiﬁcation of 4-digit NAICS codes in Mian and Suﬁ (2014). Mian and
Suﬁ classify an industry as tradable if it meets either some minimum of tradable revenue per
worker or a gross trade value minimum. Non-tradable industries are narrowly classiﬁed as
those industries involved in retail and restaurant services while construction is any industry
related to “construction, real estate, or land-development.” Most employment is not classi-
ﬁed. Employment results are essentially identical using county-level data from the Quarterly
Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW).
I use the Zillow Home Value Index for single-family residences to measure house prices
as well as Zillow’s measure of sales volume.6 This index is based on raw sales data on non-
foreclosure arms-length sales. These raw data are then used to estimate a hedonic model
in order to approximate an ideal home price index.7 The behavior of this index is broadly
similar to the Case-Shiller index but is available at a ﬁner level of geography.
To measure non-housing expenditures I rely on the Nielsen Retail Scanner database.8
The data report sales at a weekly frequency from over 40,000 stores with county-level identi-
3I am very grateful to Robert Avery for making this ﬁle available to me.
4http://www.ffiec.gov/cra/craproducts.htm.
5https://www.census.gov/econ/cbp/
6See http://www.zillow.com/research/data/.
7See http://www.zillow.com/research/zhvi-methodology-6032/ for more details of the Zillow
methodology and Dorsey et al. (2010) for a discussion of diﬀerent house price indexes.
8For more details see http://research.chicagobooth.edu/nielsen/.
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 9
ﬁers. The coverage of products is concentrated in non-durables, especially food, with broad
coverage of counties (see Beraja et al. (2014)). However, the coverage of stores and products
evolves over time. So to measure consumption growth I calculate quarterly growth rates in
total expenditures using only the set of stores present in the county in both quarters. These
rates can then be cumulated into changes at a longer horizon.
Additional data on debt stocks at the county level come from the county aggregates of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York-Equifax Consumer Credit Panel (CCP). These data
are constructed from consumer credit reports and provide annual snapshots of credit card,
mortgage, and auto debt balances and delinquency rates for about 2000 counties.9 I also use
gross income data from the IRS to measure county income.
Summary Statistics and Sample Figure 1.1 plots the ﬂow of credit originations and
purchases in the home mortgage and small business loan markets for all counties normalized
to be one in 2005. In the right panel the ﬂow of home mortgage credit is broken out by the
type of loan: reﬁnancing, home purchase, or home improvement. These categorizations are
applied by the reporting institution when ﬁling the HMDA report in accordance with HMDA
guidelines. While home mortgage credit appears to recover in 2009, this is driven entirely by
reﬁnancing. Reﬁnancing can reﬂect household’s desire for liquidity as well as opportunistic
pre-payment in order to take advantage of lower interest rates (Hurst and Staﬀord (2004)).
Home purchase and home improvement originations continue to decline to about 40% and
30% of their 2005 level respectively. Figure 1.2 plots total nonfarm employment and the
Case-Shiller and Zillow national house price indexes, also normalized to be one in January
2005. By the peak of the ﬁnancial crisis (late 2008) house prices had fallen roughly half of
the distance they would ultimately fall while employment was just beginning its sharpest
decline. House prices continued to fall until roughly 2012 while employment began to recover
in early 2010.
Tables 1.1 and 1.2 present summary statistics for the total sample of counties with pop-
ulation greater than 50,000 containing CCP controls (excluding Hawaii and Alaska) and for
the subsample of the same counties in the East and South. The East and South compose
the primary sample for the empirical analysis because these were Wachovia’s traditional re-
gions of activity. Outside of this region exposure to Wachovia is very low so that variation
is not informative. I report summary statistics for both the entire set of counties and the
subsample to demonstrate the comparability of the two samples. The population restriction
is used to reduce noise from very small counties. The subsample accounts for over half (478)
of all eligible counties and about 48% of all employment in 2006. All statistics are weighted
by population in 2006.
Total employment from 2007-2010 fell an average of 7% nationally and 6% in the subsam-
ple with tradable and construction employment experiencing larger declines. Construction
declined by about 20% and tradables by 16%. Non-tradables were far less responsive, but
still declined by 3% nationally and 2% in the subsample. Among these three categories,
9See Lee and Van der Klaauw (2010) for more details.
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 10
non-tradables are the largest with about 19% of the employment share within counties, but
all three categories account for only 44% of a county’s total employment on average (most
employment is not categorized).
There are large declines in home purchase credit and small business credit with both
falling by about 46%. Reﬁnancing credit (the total amount reﬁnanced) actually grew by
about 20% over the same period. Home purchase credit ﬂows grew by over 60% from 2002
to 2006. This growth in mortgage ﬂows led to an increase in household leverage, measured
as the ratio of mortgage debt per capita to the per capita gross income, of over 40% in both
samples. Note that this is not the average household leverage ratio, but the ratio of average
debt to average income. In 2006 this leverage ratio was roughly 1.32 nationally and 1.14
in the subsample. House prices grew by about 40% in 2002 to 2006, and then declined by
20% nationally and 15% in the subsample from 2007 to 2010. Wachovia had about a 2%
market share in home purchase mortgages and 3% of reﬁnancing loans in the subsample
and about 1% and 2% nationally. Broadly, the subsample had similar trends in important
observables as the nation in general. This suggests that extrapolating estimates recovered
from the subsample is a reasonable exercise. Cross-correlations between observables are also
very similar.
1.5 Wachovia and the “Deal from Hell”
Analyst: Okay. Ken I need to ask this question because I am getting it a lot from clients,
I mean knowing what you know now about the mortgage market and the impact [...] on your
stock price, would you still do the Golden West deal?
Kennedy Thompson (CEO of Wachovia): I think we’re going to be happy that we did
this deal long term. [...] because of the experience that we’re having in the West as we use the
branches that we acquired and I think on the mortgage side this product is...this Pick-a-Pay
product is going to be very attractive when yield curves go back to normal and as the housing
market comes out of recovery. So yes we’re going through a little pain with it now but I think
a year out, 18 months out, two years out we are going to be very happy that we did this deal.
-Transcript of Wachovia’s 2007 second quarter earnings call
Born as Wachovia National Bank in Salem, North Carolina in 1879, Wachovia Corpora-
tion eventually became the fourth-largest U.S. bank by assets in 2007. In 2007, Wachovia
held about 6.6% of all bank deposits and over $260 billion dollars of consumer loans, about
87% of which were secured by real estate. Wachovia was a national lender with wholesale
operations in every state. But due to its consistent pattern of expansion into neighboring
markets, the bank tended to have a signiﬁcantly larger market share in the East and South
(average of 2% and median of 1.5%, see Figure 1.3). Wachovia’s market share was also very
persistent within these traditional markets. Wachovia’s average share of lending from 2002-
2003 is highly predictive of Wachovia’s share of lending in 2005-2006 with an R-squared of
72% and a coeﬃcient slightly greater than one.
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 11
However, in May 2006 Wachovia acquired the nation’s second-largest thrift Golden West
Financial (GWF), operating as World Savings Bank (WSB), for $25.5 billion. Wachovia was
reportedly interested in expanding its footprint in the West where GWF had 123 branches
and $32 billion of deposits, as well as exploiting GWF’s expertise in non-traditional loan
products (Berman et al. (2006)). At the time of the purchase, Wachovia’s CEO Kennedy
Thompson described the deal as a “dream come true” (Creswell (2006)) and said that Wa-
chovia was “merging with a crown jewel” (AP (2006)). GWF had been named a “Most
Admired” company in mortgage services by Forbes magazine in 2006, in part because of
its famous option-ARM (adjustable rate mortgage) loan branded as the “Pick-a-Pay.” This
loan allowed a borrower to choose her monthly payment from a menu of options, the smallest
of which might mean the loan was negatively amortizing. The interest rate could also reset
from a typically low “teaser” rate in response to various triggers, which would then adjust
the menu of payments.
Following the announcement of the purchase, Wachovia’s stock market capitalization fell
by $1 billion, a little over 1% (Figure 1.4). Analysts worried that Wachovia had overpaid for
a GWF portfolio of high-risk loans that was exposed to declining house prices in California,
Arizona,andFlorida(Creswell(2006)). GWFwasfamouslyaportfoliolenderandsoretained
all of its loans on its balance sheet, about $125 billion in assets. It quickly became apparent
that the performance of the loans acquired from GWF was particularly poor. In the fourth
quarter of 2006, the ﬁrst time Wachovia reported GWF’s earnings with its own, Wachovia
announced a decline of $100 million in non-performing loans from its legacy operations but
an addition of $700 million in nonperforming loans from GWF (Cole (2007)). In addition,
Wachovia’s investment bank was suﬀering from poorly performing positions in the credit
default swap market. Throughout the third and fourth quarters of 2007, Wachovia reported
losses of roughly $2.4 billion on asset-backed securities and loans while increasing its reserves
for loan losses to $1.5 billion (Dash and Werdigier (2007)). The jump in the loan-loss
provision largely reﬂected “increased loss expectations for the portion of the Pick-a-Pay
portfolio” according to the chief risk oﬃcer, and induced Wachovia to raise over $3 billion
dollars of equity in December 2007 to “strengthen” the company (Cole (2007)). In the fourth
quarter of 2007 Wachovia’s earnings declined 98% from the year before, from $2.5 billion to
just $51 million.
Conditions at Wachovia deteriorated quickly in 2008. The bank took a $0.7 billion loss
in the ﬁrst quarter and reacted by stripping their chairman/CEO Kennedy Thompson of
his chairmanship and cutting the dividend (White (2008)). In the second quarter Wachovia
reported a “stunning” $9 billion dollar loss, ﬁred Thompson, announced the elimination of
about 10,000 positions (6,000 terminations and 4,000 unﬁlled vacancies), cut its dividend
for the second consecutive quarter, announced a capital raise of $7 billion, and set aside
a total of $5.6 billion for loan losses. Additionally, Wachovia ceased oﬀering “Pick-a-Pay”
mortgages and completely shuttered its wholesale mortgage arm. By July, observers were
referring to the GWF purchase as a “deal from hell” (Moore (2008)).
FollowingthefailureofWaMuonSeptember26,2008,Wachoviaexperiencedasilentbank
run where it lost $5 billion of primarily uninsured deposits in a single day. As a result, the
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 12
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) organized the sale of Wachovia’s operations
to CitiGroup to avoid Wachovia’s failure. However, Wachovia announced on October 3
that Wells Fargo would be purchasing the bank without government assistance. This was
to take advantage of a more advantageous deal and the sale was completed in December.
Following the merger, Wells Fargo continued to trim Wachovia’s operations, although layoﬀs
were moderate due to the relatively small geographic overlap between the two banks. Wells
Fargo discontinued the Wachovia brand in 2011.
1.6 Loan-Level Evidence that Wachovia Contracted
Credit to Households
WhiletheprecedingnarrativesuggestsWachoviawasadistressedinstitution, itdoesnotnec-
essarily follow that this distress was diﬀerent from other lenders, that this distress translated
into a contraction in access to credit at Wachovia, or that this contraction was economically
important. I now turn to these considerations.
That Wachovia’s lending behavior was exceptional is readily apparent from the loan-level
data in HMDA. To show this, I ﬁrst bin an application as a high-, middle-, and low-income
application depending on whether or not it fell into the top, middle, or bottom third of the
income distribution of applications in the county. Within each income bin, I regress the
probability a loan i in county c was originated on a full set of county ﬁxed eﬀects, a dummy
for whether or not the loan was submitted to Wachovia (excluding GWF), and controls using
OLS
Prob(Originated) = α +β Wachovia +γ X +e . (1.1)
it ct t i t it it
I limit the sample to applications in the South and East, exclude all loans with a loan-to-
income ratio greater than eight or income less than ﬁve thousand, and drop counties with
fewer than 2000 applications. This leaves me with about 300-800 counties depending on
the year. I also divide applications according to the type of loan: home purchase, home
improvement, and reﬁnance. My controls are included to adjust for diﬀerences in the com-
position of applicants between lenders and include the log loan-to-income ratio, log income,
race, lien status, regulator of the lender, sex of the applicant, and whether or not the loan
is for a property that will be occupied by the owner. Results are robust to not including
any controls. Because the entire set of controls are only available from 2004 onward and
because I am no longer able to identify Wachovia after 2010, I only use these years.10 The
coeﬃcients β can then be interpreted as the within-county, within-income group diﬀerence
t
in origination probability between an application ﬁled at Wachovia and an application ﬁled
at the average non-Wachovia lender, conditional on the observables.
10The HMDA data suggest that in 2010, Wells Fargo was ﬁling a number of loan originations under the
Wachovia brand that would have been ﬁled under the Wells Fargo name without the merger. Given that
Wells Fargo absorbed Wachovia at the end of 2008, it would be surprising if there were still large diﬀerences
in origination practices by 2010 so that this is not problematic.
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 13
Figure 1.5 reports the β ’s and shows that Wachovia was an average lender within the
t
county up to the crisis, but then signiﬁcantly contracted credit access across all loan cat-
egories and income groups. Low- and middle-income applicants saw their probability of
origination decline by 50 percentage points in 2009 while even high-income applicants were
20 percentage points less likely to get a loan. Similarly, applicants for home improvement
loans generally saw a decline of 20 percentage points and reﬁnance loan applicants were over
30percentagepointslesslikelytogetaloanfromWachovia. Thecounty-clusteredconﬁdence
intervals on these estimates are not reported for legibility, but are very tight. Origination
probabilities for home purchase and reﬁnance loans return to normal by 2010 while home
improvement origination rates remain lower, likely reﬂecting Wells Fargo’s tighter standards
for home improvement loans.
I also examine the intensive margin of credit for loans that were originated. I run the
same type of regression, but now with the log of the loan-to-income (LTI) ratio on originated
loans as the outcome. I restrict the sample to home purchase loans as here the LTI will
primarily reﬂect down-payment requirements and lending standards. In contrast, LTIs on
reﬁnance originations are diﬃcult to interpret due to the inability to distinguish between
“cash-out” and “rate-and-term” reﬁnance loans. Similarly, lower home improvement LTIs
are consistent with both an increase in the supply of small loans for consumption and a
tightening in lending standards. The left panel of Figure 1.6 plots the estimated coeﬃcients
and shows that Wachovia originations to low- and middle-income applicants are signiﬁcantly
less leveraged in 2008 and 2009. Wachovia’s loans to low-income applicants had LTIs almost
80% lower than originations at non-Wachovia lenders, and almost 60% for middle-income
applicants. Interestingly, LTIs for high-income originations at Wachovia actually increased
by a little less than 20%, suggesting Wachovia was actively substituting to borrowers likely
to be better credit risks. Much of the changes in LTI are explained by Wachovia excluding
low-income borrowers from credit. The right panel of Figure 1.6 plots the coeﬃcients from
puttinglogincomeontheleft-handside(herewithcounty-clustered95%conﬁdenceintervals)
and combining all income groups. Beginning in 2008, home purchase loans originated by
Wachovia have an income over 10% higher than originations at the average non-Wachovia
lender. This diﬀerence increases to almost 70% in 2009 and almost disappears by 2010.
Together these results suggest that Wachovia was contracting credit across the board, but
that low- and middle-income applicants were far less likely to get credit from Wachovia.
1.7 Spatial Frictions
A critical determinant of how much Wachovia’s contraction may aﬀect real outcomes is the
strength of frictions to substitution in the household credit market. If households are able to
substitute across lenders easily, then the collapse of a single lender is unlikely to aﬀect local
outcomes. Substantial work in ﬁrm credit has relied on “soft” information as an explanation
for sticky lending relationships. The importance of these frictions and relationship lending
in ﬁrm ﬁnance has been well-documented by Berger and Udell (1995) and Petersen and
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 14
Rajan (1994), among others. The presence of these frictions also underlie the cross-sectional
approaches to identifying the eﬀects of ﬁrm credit supply shocks in Peek and Rosengren
(2000) and Greenstone et al. (2012). There is less evidence, however, on the importance of
these frictions in the household credit market, but Agarwal et al. (2011) ﬁnd evidence for
the use of soft information in home equity lending.
However, important work has shown that household behavior in the household credit
market may result in limited substitution across lenders. Informational limitations can
induce suboptimal shopping (Woodward and Hall (2012)) and a misunderstanding of loan
terms (Bucks and Pence (2008) and Gerardi et al. (2010)). This “confusion” can reduce
the price elasticity of borrower demand and so the elasticity of substitution across lenders
(ChioveanuandZhou(2013)). Totheextentthatborrowersearchislimited, itmightsuggest
thatphysicaldistancemightbeanimportantdeterminantofwhichlenderaborrowerchooses.
The literature on small business lending has emphasized the importance of spacial distance
in determining terms between lenders and commercial borrowers (Petersen and Rajan (1994)
and Petersen and Rajan (2002)). But little is known about the importance of distance and
spatial frictions in the household credit market.
I test for the presence of these frictions with respect to distance from Wachovia. Specif-
ically, I estimate a local zero-degree polynomial regression of the relationship between Wa-
chovia’s market share in 2007 in a census tract and that census tract’s distance to the nearest
Wachovia branch
Wachovia’s Market Share = f(d )+e .
i i i
I limit the sample to census tracts within 4 miles of a Wachovia branch and demean each of
the observations by the commuting zone average for all included census tracts. I weight the
observations with an Epanechnikov kernel and set the bandwidth by rule of thumb. Figure
1.7 shows that Wachovia’s market share is strongly declining in distance. The diﬀerence
within a commuting zone for moving a census tract from right next to a Wachovia branch
to about 4 miles away reduces Wachovia’s market share by about 0.4 percentage point for
home purchase loans and 0.5 percentage point for reﬁnancing loans. Wachovia’s average
market share in these census tracts is about 2% in the home purchase market and 5% in
the reﬁnance market so that the spatial frictions induce economically signiﬁcant diﬀerences
across census tracts.
Given this evidence for spatial frictions and the signiﬁcant declines in credit access from
the loan-level regressions, it is important to check if census tracts near a Wachovia branch
had observably diﬀerent trends in household credit growth during the boom or bust. Figure
1.8estimatessimilarregressionsbutreplacesmarketsharewiththegrowthratedemeanedby
thecommutingzoneaverageforallcensustractswithinfourmilesofaWachoviabranch. The
top two panels show that neither home purchase nor reﬁnance loan growth had a signiﬁcant
relationship with distance from a Wachovia branch in the boom period. While there are
some non-zero estimates the relationships do not resemble the market share estimates at
all and the standard errors are very large. However, the bottom two panels show that
during the crisis census tracts closer to a Wachovia branch, and so more likely to depend
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 15
on Wachovia, experienced deeper declines in home purchase and reﬁnancing loan growth,
although the conﬁdence intervals for reﬁnancing loan growth are wide enough to not reject
the inclusion of zero. The relationship between loan growth and distance from 2007-2010 is
strikingly diﬀerent from the pre-crisis estimates, suggesting that Wachovia’s contraction was
not completely undone by substitution to other lenders.
These results at the census tract level show that distance from a Wachovia branch is an
important determinant of the Wachovia’s market share and that this same distance resulted
in census tracts that depended on Wachovia experiencing larger declines in household credit
during Wachovia’s collapse. However, census tracts are unlikely to be useful for shedding
light on any potential employment eﬀectts since these demand eﬀects might spillover to
neighboring census tracts. So going forward I aggregate my results to the county level.
1.8 Exclusion Restriction, First Stage, and Reduced
Form
Recall that the aim is to have an instrumental variable that will allow me to estimate the
following system and retrieve γˆ = βES/βLS
L(cid:98) = σZ +e ,
i i 1i
E(cid:98) = γL(cid:98) +e .
i i 2i
While access to credit at Wachovia contracted in 2008 and 2009 and census tracts exposed to
Wachovia had lower loan growth, it still remains to show: (1) that exposure to Wachovia is
likely to satisfy the exclusion restriction (is not correlated with e ); and (2) that exposure to
si
Wachovia provides a strong ﬁrst stage (σ (cid:54)= 0), or that areas where Wachovia was important
experienced lower growth in household credit. I use the average of Wachovia’s overall market
share of originations in household credit lending in the 2005 and 2006 HMDA data as my
instrumental variable
Wachovia Exposure = (Wachovia Share +Wachovia Share )/2.
i i,2005 i,2006
There is a diﬃculty in constructing this market share. The HMDA data report not only
mortgage originations, but mortgage purchases (when a second institution purchases the
loan from the originating institution). Due to the inability to distinguish between these loans
the HMDA aggregates suﬀer from a well-known problem of double-counting (see Scheessele
(1998)). This suggests that one should not include purchases when calculating market shares
since originators will have a deﬂated market share. However, Stanton et al. (2014) document
that purchases allow one to trace the important wholesale and correspondent relationships
that funded much of the mortgage market in this period. Ignoring purchases could then
cause me to miss the links between lenders and counties that are critical for my exercise
in the second part. The risk of artiﬁcially deﬂating exposure to Wachovia is that it will
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 16
inﬂate my resulting reduced form estimates. Since my interest is not in the reduced form,
per se, but instead in using exposure as an instrument (where the scaling error will cancel)
the danger of rescaling is not critical. This is especially true when weighed against the risk
of missing important lender-county connections in the second part of my paper. Here I use
only originations to compute market share. But all my reduced form results are robust to
using originations and purchases to construct market share. I also provide non-parametric
speciﬁcations to provide another quantiﬁcation of the economic signiﬁcance.
Unless otherwise noted, my estimates are clustered at the state level. To adjust for
the relatively small number of clusters, I report p-values and conﬁdence intervals computed
with the pairs bootstrap with 1,000 replications. All results are robust to using the wild
cluster bootstrap of Cameron et al. (2008), but Kline and Santos (2012) show that the wild
bootstrap can have worse performance under misspeciﬁcation. The pairs bootstrap, because
it is nonparametric, is more robust and so I rely on it here. My results also hold when using
the spatial correlation correction of Conley (1999).
The loan-level results showed that Wachovia was an average lender until the crisis, sug-
gesting that Wachovia was expanding credit relative to other lenders prior to the crisis.
But counties exposed to Wachovia might be diﬀerent for some other reason, which would
be potentially problematic. As a ﬁrst check, Table 1.3 regresses exposure to Wachovia on
a set of observables predictive of distress in local credit or employment markets. Overall,
exposure to Wachovia is not strongly associated with indicators of the house price boom,
subprime lending, or other important observables. There is a slight association with growth
in nontradable employment growth and the level of mortgage leverage (not robust to state
ﬁxedeﬀects). Critically, populationgrowth, theshareofemploymentinconstruction, growth
in home purchase credit, and growth in construction employment are not predictive of ex-
posure to Wachovia. The correlation with the share of HUD-regulated lenders is negative
and robust across speciﬁcations, suggesting that exposure to Wachovia is not indicative of
subprime lending. Overall, the joint tests of the regression signiﬁcance indicate only mild
statistical signiﬁcance for the regressions without state ﬁxed eﬀects. In other words, most
of the variation in exposure to Wachovia across counties is not associated with indicators of
the economic boom and bust.
Another way to check the Wachovia’s validity as an instrument is to determine if the
timing of its county-level eﬀects are consistent with that implied by the narrative and
application-levelevidence. Forexample, Iwouldbeconcernedabouttheexclusionrestriction
if exposure to Wachovia is storngly correlated with household credit growth in any direction
well before the onset of the crisis. To check this, I estimate the following repeated cross-
section regression of household credit, house price, and non-tradable employment relative to
the base year of 2007 on exposure to Wachovia. I choose 2007 as the base year because that
is the year right before Wachovia appears to begin contracting credit to households
(cid:92)
Outcome = α +β Wachovia Exposure +(cid:15) .
i,t,2007 t t i it
Figure 1.9 shows that counties exposed to Wachovia generally had no pre-crisis trends in
any of these observables. While there is some slight credit growth in counties exposed to
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 17
Wachovia in the pre-crisis period, the relationship is small and the standard errors are very
large. After 2007, however, counties exposed to Wachovia experienced larger declines in
household credit growth that persist to 2011. Trends in non-tradable employment are also
striking with essentially no pre-crisis trend in employment for counties exposed to Wachovia.
But beginning in 2009 counties dependent on Wachovia began to experience larger declines
in non-tradable employment. Finally, counties exposed to Wachovia also did not have a
signiﬁcant trend in relative growth in house prices leading up to the crisis. But again in
2009, after the initial decline in household credit, house prices began to fall, although the
diﬀerences across counties are not statistically signiﬁcant at standard levels of precision.
Overall, the timing and direction of the Wachovia eﬀects are consistent with a contraction
in credit from Wachovia due to the crisis.
These relationships provide a stark contrast to the trends associated with household
mortgage leverage in 2006. Household credit growth was booming in counties with high
leverage until 2006, when growth turned severely negative and remained so until 2009. Non-
tradable employment was also growing faster in counties with high leverage until 2008 and
2009. Finally, leveraged counties also saw house prices growing faster until 2006, when
growth turned negative and remained so until about 2012. These correlations show the
boom-bust pattern discussed by DiMaggio and Kermani (2014) and Kermani (2012), which
are very diﬀerent from the patterns associated with Wachovia.
Eﬀect of Exposure to Wachovia on Household Credit Table 1.4 gives the results
from regressing household credit growth from 2007 to 2010 on exposure to Wachovia. The
standard ﬁrst stage diagnostics in column one are very good with a large F-statistic and R-
squared. Together with the eﬀects evident in Figure 1.9, weak instrument issues are unlikely
to be an issue. As Olea and Pﬂueger (2013) show, the traditional ﬁrst stage diagnostics
are generally invalid in the presence of clustered residuals. When I compute the critical
values for their test (the robust F-statistic here is identical to the eﬃcient F-statistic they
suggest when just identiﬁed) I can reject their “worst-case” scenario at at least the 10% level.
The estimate suggests a one percentage point increase in exposure to Wachovia decreases
home mortgages by over 2% from 2007-2010. This eﬀect captures the direct decline in loans
from Wachovia and any general equilibrium eﬀects incident to the credit contraction (for
example, the contraction in credit also causes a decline in income and house prices). The
size of this eﬀect is large. In addition to multipliers arising from declines in demand and
subsequent falls in income, any eﬀects on house price expectations are likely to signiﬁcantly
lower mortgage lending across all lenders, not just Wachovia. However, alternative measures
of exposure such as deposit share and share of only originations gives smaller eﬀects (from
.5% to 1.7%) with similar statisical signiﬁcance. The scaling issue must be kept in mind
when interpreting these results. Column two introduces several important controls with
no signiﬁcant change in the coeﬃcient and column three includes state ﬁxed eﬀects. State
ﬁxed eﬀets lead to a relatively large declinein the point estimate and in precision, although
the estimates hold up favorably relative to other observables such as leverage that have
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 18
been discussed in the literature. Columns four, ﬁve, and six repeat the speciﬁcations for
growth in the total amount of reﬁnancing credit. Reﬁnancing growth seems to have a very
large association with exposure to Wachovia, with a one percentage point increase in the
exposure measure decreasing reﬁnancing growth anywhere from 2 to over 3%. However,
these estimates are very imprecise, even without state ﬁxed eﬀects. This suggests that it is
important to isolate the diﬀerent types of reﬁnancing (cash-outs vs. interest rests). Figure
1.10 plots household credit growth against Wachovia exposure and visually conﬁrms the
relationship provided by the regressions. The left panel simply plots the association with a
regression line while the right panel removes state trends. Consistent with the regressions,
the relationship is stronger using interstate variation, but both panels show a signiﬁcant and
negative association between exposure to Wachovia and home purchase credit growth.
To partially address the scaling issue I also report semiparametric estimates of the rela-
tionship between exposure to Wachovia and credit growth in Figure 1.11. Because I cannot
weight observations by their size I limit the sample to only those counties with at least
100,000 residents. The line reports the kernel-weighted estimate of the growth in home
purchase credit (left panel) and reﬁnance credit (right panel) as a function of exposure to
Wachovia. Consistent with the regressions and scatter plots, exposure to Wachovia has a
strongly negative relationship with home purchase credit growth. Moving from the most
exposed counties to the least suggests a diﬀerence in household credit growth close to 10%,
not far from the WLS estimates. The association with reﬁnancing growth is also strongly
negative with the implied diﬀerence approaching 20%. However, there is also much more
dispersion in reﬁnancing credit growth again emphasizing the need to eventually isolate
reﬁnancing that results in equity extraction. Together, these results show that counties
dependent on Wachovia experienced signiﬁcantly lower growth in household credit.
Eﬀect of Exposure to Wachovia on Expenditures and Employment Beforemoving
to the 2SLS estimates of the eﬀect of household credit on employment, it is important to
explore whether or not exposure to Wachovia had a discernible eﬀect on household expen-
ditures and employment in the reduced form and that these are likely resulting from eﬀects
on the supply of household credit.
The decline in household credit from Wachovia could have aﬀected household demand in
several ways. First, declines in home equity lines of credit (HELOCs) or cash-out reﬁnanc-
ing loans will directly reduce household liquidity and expenditures (see Hurst and Staﬀord
(2004) and Cooper (2013)). Second, as households are denied mortgages they are less likely
to purchase a home. In addition, any consumption (often durables and home services) com-
plementary to a home purchase will be foregone, although this is potentially countered by
any substitution away from housing. Table 1.5 shows that exposure to Wachovia aﬀected
retail expenditures, house price growth, and housing sales. I measure expenditures using
the Nielsen Retail Scanner data. Expenditure growth from 2007-2010 declined by about
.8% in response to a one percentage point increase in Wachovia exposure with the eﬀect
very robust to controls, state ﬁxed eﬀects, and alternative weights. Table 1.5 shows that a
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 19
one percentage point increase in Wachovia exposure caused at least a 1.7% decline in house
sales. This eﬀect is also robust to controlling for mortgage leverage, state ﬁxed eﬀects, or
alternative weights. Finally, there is also evidence in Table 1.5 that house prices decline from
2007-2010, although the eﬀects are quite small and imprecise. The relationship becomes sig-
niﬁcanly larger when extending the horizon to 2007-2012, although state ﬁxed eﬀects again
reduce the precision non-trivially. Exposure to Wachovia lowers house prices from 2007-2010
by about .3%, but the eﬀect on house prices almost triples to 1.3% when I extend the horizon
to 2012. This long lag suggests signiﬁcant stickiness/momentum in home prices, potentially
due to homeowners delaying sales in response to the weakening price level (see Genesove and
Mayer (2001)). Overall, these results suggest exposure to Wachovia resulted in large declines
in retail expenditures and home sales with some evidence of declines in house prices.
Thedeclineinretailexpendituresmightcauseadeclineinlocalnon-tradableemployment
if employment is determined by demand to some extent. Table 1.6 shows the eﬀect of
exposuretoWachoviaonnon-tradableemploymentandpayrolls. Columnsoneandtwoshow
that losses in local non-tradable employment are higher in counties exposed to Wachovia,
from 0.4 to 0.7% decline depending on the inclusion of state ﬁxed eﬀects. Columns three and
four show that payrolls also decline as a result with a similar and possibly larger eﬀect. All
of these results are economically large and statistically fairly robust. These results suggest
exposure to Wachovia did have eﬀects on local real outcomes in the sectors likely to be
aﬀected.
It is also possible that the decline in house sales, house prices, and potential declines in
home investment could aﬀect local construction employment, particularly residential con-
struction employment. Table 1.7 shows the results of exposure to Wachovia on total con-
struction employment. Column one shows that exposure to Wachovia seems to cause a
decline in overall construction employment, but this eﬀect is not robust to state ﬁxed eﬀects
(column two). Columns three and four do suggest that exposure to Wachovia resulted in
payroll losses, but the diﬀerence between the two columns is very large. Table 1.8 limits
the outcome to growth in only non-residential construction sectors. But here we see that
once we control for state ﬁxed eﬀects there is no association between exposure to Wachovia
and non-residential construction growth. Table 1.9 limits the outcome to growth only in
residential construction employment and payrolls. Here we see that large losses in residen-
tial construction employment are associated with Wachovia exposure, altough there is still
a large diﬀerence between the estimates with and without state ﬁxed eﬀects. However, the
lack of a response in non-residential construction indicates again that Wachovia is aﬀecting
outcomes through household credit market exposure.
If these eﬀects are driven by declines in household demand, then it would be surprising to
seeanysigniﬁcanteﬀectsontradables, whichwoulddependfarlessonlocaldemand. Consis-
tent with this, Table 1.10 shows that while tradable employment has a negative relationship
with Wachovia exposure the estimate is highly insigniﬁcant and exposure to Wachovia ex-
plains very little of the variation (0.002 r-squared). Additionally, the eﬀect on payrolls even
appears to be positive once state ﬁxed eﬀects are included.
It is possible that the losses in construction and non-tradables are undone by expansions
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 20
in sectors that are less aﬀected by the shock. Table 1.11 and Table 1.12 present results for
employment excluding all tradables and for total employment. We see that even including
these sectors there are large declines in employment, although not as large as the losses
in residential construction and non-tradables. As a further robustness check, I present non-
parametric estimates of the relationship between both nontradable and tradable employment
in Figure 1.12. These estimates show that both types of employment have a strong, negative
relationship with exposure to Wachovia and that this relationship is reasonably linear.
While exposure to Wachovia caused losses in employment consistent with a fall in house-
hold demand, an important alternative to rule out is that the eﬀects from Wachovia are
actually due to contractions in ﬁrm credit, not household credit. While this would be in-
teresting, it would be problematic for the interpretation of my results as illuminating the
household credit channel. Ex ante, this is unlikely due to the size of Wachovia’s home mort-
gage lending relative to its ﬁrm lending: the ﬂow of Wachovia’s home mortgage lending
was roughly ﬁve times the size of its small business lending. While ﬂow measures of total
ﬁrm credit are unavailable, the stock of Wachovia’s household lending on its call report was
about four times the size of its total commercial and industrial loan stock. Aggregate trends
also suggest that Wachovia’s distress primarily resulted in a contraction in household credit.
The left panel of Figure 1.13 plots the ﬂow of household and small business originations
for Wachovia and the market in general. The right panel plots the stock of household and
commercial loans reported on commercial bank call reports for both groups. Both graphs
show that the decline in lending from Wachovia was primarily concentrated in the household
lending market while Wachovia’s lending to ﬁrms generally tracked the market trends.
Table 1.13 reports the relationship between household and ﬁrm credit and exposure to
WachoviainthesetwomarketsusingtheHMDAandCRAdata. Columnoneincludesaﬁxed
eﬀect for whether or not a county is in the top half of exposure to Wachovia in the small
business credit market. The coeﬃcient on exposure to Wachovia in the household credit
market is essentially unchanged and the coeﬃcient on exposure in the ﬁrm credit market
is economically small and statistically insigniﬁcant. Column two replaces the continuous
measure of exposure to Wachovia in the household credit market with a discrete measure
identical to the CRA measure of high Wachovia exposure. Exposure to Wachovia in the ﬁrm
credit market enters with the wrong sign, positively, while exposure in the household credit
market enters negatively. These results suggest, surprisingly, that exposure to Wachovia in
the ﬁrm credit market has essentially no eﬀect on declines in household credit growth.
Columns three, four, and ﬁve replace growth in household credit with growth in small
business credit. In contrast to the ﬁrst two columns, exposure to Wachovia in the ﬁrm credit
is negatively associated with growth in ﬁrm credit (exposure in the household credit market
also enters negatively). The precision of the estimates is never high, but the results are
very diﬀerent from those for household credit growth. Column three simply shows that high
exposure to Wachovia indicates a large, but imprecisely estimated, decline in ﬁrm credit
growth. Column four includes continuous exposure to Wachovia in the household credit
market. This reduced the sign on high exposure to Wachovia in the ﬁrm credit market
but the estimate is still economically very large. Exposure to Wachovia in the household
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 21
credit market also has a negative eﬀect on ﬁrm credit growth. Finally, column ﬁve uses both
discrete measures of exposure to Wachovia. Again, exposure to Wachovia in both markets
indicateslargedeclinesinﬁrmcreditgrowth. Surprisingly, thecoeﬃcientonhouseholdcredit
exposure is about two percentage points large than the coeﬃcient on ﬁrm credit exposure.
Overall, these regressions show that exposure to Wachovia in the ﬁrm credit market does
predict declines in ﬁrm credit, but there seems to be no relationship between exposure to
Wachovia in the ﬁrm credit market and household credit growth.
Theseresults,especiallycolumnoneofTable1.13emphasizethatexposuretoWachoviain
thehouseholdcreditmarketlargelyreﬂectsshockstothehouseholdcreditmarket. Tofurther
support this conclusion Table 1.14 reports regressions of nontradable and total employment
growth on measures of exposure to Wachovia in both markets. Column one controls for
above-median exposure to Wachovia in the CRA data, which has no economic or statistical
signiﬁcance on nontradable employment growth. Additionally, there is no change on the
coeﬃcient for exposure to Wachovia in the household credit market. Column two uses both
discrete measures. While both coeﬃcients are statistically imprecise, only the coeﬃcient on
exposure in the household credit market is economically signiﬁcant with exposure in the ﬁrm
credit market indicating only .1% lower employment growth as opposed to 2% lower. The
results on total employment provide the same takeaways. While exposure to Wachovia in
the ﬁrm credit market predicts lower ﬁrm credit growth, this exposure has essentially no
relationship with the losses in employment associated with exposure to Wachovia.
Another possibility is that what I am labeling hosuehold credit is actually functioning
as ﬁrm credit. Adelino et al. (2013) document that small ﬁrms, essentially entrepreneurs,
rely on household credit, especially reﬁnancing, to start and operate their ﬁrms. Consistent
with this they ﬁnd that instrumented growth in house prices leads to growth in the number
of of very small, fewer than 4 employees, establishments and essentially no eﬀects on larger
ﬁrms. Interestingly, they do not ﬁnd that the subsequent decline in house prices has similar
employment eﬀects. To check if my results are being driven entirely by growth in small
establishments I regress establishment growth for diﬀerent size categories on exposure to
Wachovia in the household credit market in Table 1.15. I ﬁnd that establishments of all
sizes respond to Wachovia exposure in a similar way, with some evidence that growth in
large establishments is more responsive. In general, there is no evidence that the results
above are driven only by growth in small establishments, which would suggest a ﬁrm-side
story.
Instrumental Variable Estimates Exposure to Wachovia caused declines in household
credit and employment. The eﬀects are distinct from the boom and bust in house prices,
changesinsmallbusinesscredit,tradeshocks,andindustry-speciﬁcdeclinesinlabordemand.
Given these results I use exposure to Wachovia as an instrument for household credit growth
to recover βES/βLS, the ratio of employment and credit quantities elasticities with respect
to the shock to credit (see Section 1.3).
Table1.16presentstheOLSand2SLSestimatesfortheeﬀectsofhouseholdcreditgrowth
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 22
ontotalemploymentgrowthfrom2007-2010. Iusetotalemploymentasmybaselineoutcome
in order to capture any substitution eﬀects that might be obscured by looking only at non-
tradable employment. If I interpret the OLS coeﬃcient as causal then it implies a 10%
reduction in home mortgages will cause a decline in employment of about 1.2%. However,
the 2SLS estimates in Table 1.16 show the OLS coeﬃcient is biased downward with the
estimate in column two about twice as large. The ﬁrst-stage diagnostics are quite good
across all speciﬁcations (which was apparent in the reduced form results earlier), which
suggests Wachovia is unlikely to be a weak instrument. The elasticity of 0.3 means a 10%
decline in household credit driven by supply shocks would cause a 3% decline in total county
employment. Column three includes state ﬁxed eﬀects with no signiﬁcant change in the
estimated coeﬃcient. Column four performs an additional robustness check by using only
counties with at least 100,000 residents. This addresses the concern that employment and
credit dynamics in small counties might not represent real changes. All of these estimates
are strikingly similar.
It is striking that the 2SLS estimate is so much larger than the OLS estimate. Intuition
about omitted variable bias would normally lead us to expect a smaller 2SLS estimate.
However, there are multiple factors that could reverse this logic. Changes in demand for
mortgage credit might be very volatile and only slightly related to broader employment
growth. For example, a decline in mortgage demand might occur because households are
substituting a home purchase for nondurable consumption. This type of shock might have
neutral or even expansionary eﬀects on total employment.
In detail, let σ2 be the variance of variable X. I allow Cov(v˜,D(cid:98) ) (cid:54)= 0, or that demand
X i i
shocks to credit can be correlated with factors aﬀecting the outcome of interest. We see the
OLS estimate of E(cid:98) = γL(cid:98) +e would give (asymptotically)
i i i
Cov(E(cid:98) ,L(cid:98) ) βESβLSσ2 +βEDβLDσ2 +βEv˜βLDCov(v˜,D(cid:99))
plimγˆOLS = i i = S D i i
Var(L(cid:98)i) (βLS)2σS2 +(βLD)2σD2 +(βLvl)2σv2l
Standard omitted variable bias logic (Cov(v˜,D(cid:99)) > 0) suggests the estimate could be in-
i i
ﬂated. However, it is entirely possible that the terms in the denominator are so large as to
render γˆOLS < βES/βLS. For example, this could occur if demand shocks in the mortgage
market are relatively unimportant for total employment (βED small), but demand shocks
are very volatile (σ2 large).
D
Additionally, many types of credit such as small consumer loans and home equity line
of credit loans are not recorded in the HMDA data, but it is likely that Wachovia also con-
tracted in these markets. This reinforces my interpretation of these results as the elasticity
of employment with respect to a measure of household credit, and not just home mortgage
credit. However there are two potential concerns. First, it is possible that Wachovia’s mar-
ket share in these other types of credit is very diﬀerent, so that Wachovia’s home mortgage
market share is a poor indicator of exposure to these credit contractions. I ﬁnd that Wa-
chovia’s market shares across counties in the three types of credit that I do measure are very
correlated (0.72 to 0.85). Moreover, regressing the share of home improvement and reﬁnance
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 23
loans on the share of home purchase loans gives highly signiﬁcant coeﬃcients of 0.88 and 1.25
respectively. While diﬀerent from one, these coeﬃcients suggest Wachovia’s market shares
across credit types are relatively similar.
To the best of my knowledge, these are the ﬁrst estimates of the eﬀect of supply shocks
to household credit on employment during the Great Recession. The nearest comparison is
to DiMaggio and Kermani (2014), who estimate the eﬀects of expansions in household credit
on non-tradable employment during the boom years. Using changes in lending regulations
to instrument household credit at the county level, they recover an elasticity of about 0.2.
This is somewhat smaller, but given the conﬁdence interevals, very close to my estimates.
This suggests the employment eﬀects of credit contractions were similar in the boom and
the bust.
Heterogeneous Eﬀects The literature on curvature of the consumption function suggests
household leverage and income might aﬀect the response to household credit supply shocks
(see Baker (2013) and Carroll and Kimball (1996)). Columns one and two of Table 1.17
show that the elasticity in low-income counties is signiﬁcantly larger than that recovered
in high-income counties. Columns three and four show that high-leverage counties have a
larger response than counties with less leverage. I ﬁnd the estimated eﬀect is slightly larger
in low-income counties and there is essentially no diﬀerence between high- and low-leverage
counties. Whilethediﬀerenceinincomeissuggestive, furtherworkwiththeabilitytorecover
more precise estimates is necessary.
1.9 Conclusion
In this chapted I provided evidence that household demand and employment responded
strongly to supply-side contractions in credit during the Great Recession. This lays an em-
pirical foundation for models using shocks to household credit to explain the Great Recession
as well as an empirical moment for use in calibrations. But the elasticity of 0.3 alone does
not imply that the supply shock to household credit was an important contributor to em-
ployment losses. This depends on both the elasticity and the size of the shock. While I can
account for eﬀect of the shock from Wachovia, this does not quantify the size of shocks from
other lenders. In the next chapter I construct a measure of the broader shock to household
credit and perform the simple accounting exercise to try and quantify the size of the supply
shock to household credit.
----------------CC
RH
IA
S
IP
ST
E
R
Figure 1.1: Aggregate Credit Flows Normalized to 2005 Level
1
.
Note: The left panel plots total ﬂows of home mortgage and small business loans normalized to be one in 2005. We see that the mortgage H
marketstartedtodeclinein2006,butgrowthinsmallbusinesscreditmarketdidnotbecomenegativeuntil2008. Therightpanelseparates O
U
home mortgage lending into home purchase, home improvement, and reﬁnancing loans, all normalized to one in 2005. Both home purchase
S
and home improvement mortgages decline through 2010 or 2011 while reﬁnancing loans spike in 2009 and 2010 when the Federal Funds E
H
Rate drops to zero. Home improvement loans were roughly 3% of the total home mortgage market (by origination value) in 2005 while
O
home purchase loans were about 48%. Mortgage calculations are from the HMDA data and small business loan calculations are from the L
D
CRA data.
C
R
1.2 1 E
D
I
T
.8 A
1 N
D
R
6
. E
A
8
. L
E
.4 F
F
6 E
.
C
2 T
. S
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Time O
.4 F
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Time Home Purchase Refinancing T
H
E
Home Mortgages Small Business Loans Home Improvement
F
I
N
A
N
C
I
A
L
2
4
----------------CC
RH
IA
Figure 1.2: Nonfarm Employment and House Prices Normalized to January 2005 Level S
IP
ST
Note: This ﬁgure plots total non-farm employment from the BLS (left axis) and the Case-Shiller and Zillow national house price indexes E
R
(right axis) at monthly frequency, all normalized to be one in January 2005. We see that house prices stopped growing by mid-2006 and
began to decline in 2007, falling steeply from 2008 and 2009. By contrast, employment began its decline in early 2008 and then accelerated 1
.
at about the third quarter. The red line indicates the September 2008, the beginning of the peak crisis period.
H
O
4 2 U
0 1. S
. E
1 H
O
L
1 D
.
2 1 C
nt0 es R
.
e1 c E
m ri D
P
oy 1e  IT
pl s A
m u
1 o N
E H D
9 R
. E
A
L
8
E
9
. 8 F
. F
E
2005m1 2006m7 2008m1 2009m7 2011m1 2012m7 C
Time T
S
O
F
Nonfarm Employment Case−Shiller T
H
E
F
I
N
Zillow
A
N
C
I
A
L
2
5
----------------CC
RH
IA
S
IP
ST
E
R
1
.
Figure 1.3: Distribution of Average of Wachovia Share of Home Mortgage Lending in 2005-2006 H
O
Note: This ﬁgure plots Wachovia’s average market share of originated and purchased loans over 2005-2006 in the home mortgage market U
S
as measured in the HMDA data. It shows that Wachovia had a national presence, but that its market share tended to be fairly small E
H
everywhere but the East and South.
O
L
D
C
R
E
D
I
T
A
N
D
R
E
A
L
E
F
F
E
C
T
S
O
F
T
H
E
F
I
N
A
N
C
I
A
L
2
6
----------------CC
RH
IA
S
Figure 1.4: Wachovia’s Collapse IP
ST
E
Note: ThisﬁgureplotsthestockpricesforWachoviaandWellsFargoandtheunweightedS&P500index, allnormalizedtobeonein2004. R
The ﬁrst red line marks Wachovia’s purchase of GWF on May 7, 2006, and the second red line marks the failure of Lehman Brothers on 1
.
September 15, 2008. All measures track each other relatively closely until 2006. Wachovia experienced a loss of $1 billion dollars in market
H
capitalization upon purchasing GWF and through 2007-2008 Wachovia’s stock performed signiﬁcantly worse than the broader market and
O
Wells Fargo. In December 2008, Wells Fargo purchased Wachovia, and the trade of Wachovia stock halted. Data are daily averages from U
CRSP. S
E
H
2 O
L
D
C
R
E
5
. D
1
I
T
A
N
e D
c
ri1 R
P
E
A
L
E
F
5
. F
E
C
T
S
O
0 F
1−Jan−4 1−Jan−5 1−Jan−6 1−Jan−7 1−Jan−8 1−Jan−9 1−Jan−10 T
H
Time E
F
Wells Fargo S&P 500 IN
A
Wachovia
N
C
I
A
L
2
7
----------------CC
RH
IA
S
IP
Figure 1.5: Wachovia and Origination Probabilities: Diﬀerence Within County and Income Group ST
E
R
Note: These ﬁgures plot the within-county diﬀerence in origination probability for an application submitted to Wachovia relative to the
1
averagenon-Wachovialenderforhomepurchase,homeimprovement,andreﬁnanceloans: Prob(Originated) =α +β Wachovia +γ X + .
it ct t i t it
e .Eachregressionisrunwithinthetop,middle,andbottomthirdofincomesineachcounty. Theﬁguresshowthatleadinguptothecrisis H
it
O
Wachovia was an average lender in the county, but by 2008 and 2009 an applicant to Wachovia was much less likely to have an application
U
originated. This trend is apparent in all types of loans and income groups. At the peak, this diﬀerence is over 50 percentage points for S
E
home purchase loans, 20 percentage points for home improvement loans, and 30 percentage points for reﬁnance loans. Each regression is
H
estimated with OLS and includes a full set of county ﬁxed eﬀects. Controls are the log LTI ratio, log income, an indicator for the applicant O
being black, ﬁrst and second lien indicators, sex indicator, and an indicator for whether or not the property will be owner-occupied. I L
D
excludeallloanswithanLTIgreaterthaneightorareportedincomelessthanﬁvethousand. IlimitthesampletoallcountiesintheSouth
C
and East with at least 2,000 valid applications. The number of observations varies from about two million to three-hundred thousand. All
R
data are from from HMDA. Conﬁdence intervals are not reported so that the ﬁgures are legible, but they are very small. E
D
I
Home Purchase Home Improvement Refinance T
2 2 2 A
. . .
N
D
R
n0 n0 n0 E
o o o
ati ati ati A
n n n
gi gi gi L
y of Ori−.2 y of Ori−.2 y of Ori−.2 EF
abilit abilit abilit FE
b b b
o o o C
Pr−.4 Pr−.4 Pr−.4 T
S
O
F
6 6 6
−. −. −.
T
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
year year year H
E
F
Low Income Middle Income I
N
A
High Income
N
C
I
A
L
2
8
----------------CC
RH
IA
S
Figure 1.6: Wachovia and Log LTI and Log Income on Originated Home Purchase Loans: ISPT
E
Note: The left ﬁgure plots the within-county, within-income group diﬀerence in log LTI for a home purchase loan originated by Wachovia R
relative to an origination by the average non-Wachovia lender: log(LTI) = α +β Wachovia +γ X +e . Income groups are deﬁned 1
it ct t i t it it .
as the top, middle, and bottom third of incomes in each county. The right ﬁgure plots coeﬃcients and county-clustered standard errors
H
for regressions of log income for home purchase originations by Wachovia across all income groups. Leading up to the crisis Wachovia was O
essentially indistinguishable from the average lender in the county, but by 2008 and 2009 a loan originated by Wachovia had a signiﬁcantly U
S
lowerLTIratioforlow-andmiddle-incomeapplicantswhilehigh-incomeapplicantshadaslightlyhigherLTIratio. Thisdiﬀerencedisappears E
in2010. Originatedloans byWachovia hadaverageincomeleading uptothe crisis, butin2008 and2009the average incomeofa Wachovia H
O
origination increased by over 60%, indicating deep substitution to high-income borrowers. Controls include an indicator for the applicant
L
being black, ﬁrst and second lien indicators, sex indicator, and an indicator for whether or not the property will be owner-occupied. I D
exclude all loans with an LTI greater than eight, income less than ﬁve thousand, and limit the sample to all counties in the South and East C
with at least 2,000 valid applications. The number of observations varies from almost three million to three-hundred thousand depending R
E
on the speciﬁcation. D
I
T
Log LTI: Difference Within County and Income Group Log Income: Difference Within County
A
.2 N
8 D
.
R
0 E
A
6 L
.
−.2 E
TI F
L
Log −.4 g Income.4 FECT
o
L S
−.6 O
F
2
. T
8 H
−.
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 E
year F
0 I
Low Income Middle Income N
A
High Income 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 N
year
C
I
A
L
2
9
----------------CC
RH
IA
S
IP
ST
E
Figure 1.7: Wachovia’s Share of Census Tract Originations in 2007 and Distance from Nearest Wachovia Branch R
1
.
Note: These ﬁgures plot local polynomial smoothed estimates of Wachovia’s market share in a census tract as a function of that tracts
distance to the nearest Wachovia branch: Wachovia’s Market Share = f(d )+e where d is the distance in miles of the census tract H
i i i i O
centroidtothenearestWachoviabranch. IlimitthesampletoallcensustractswithinfourmilesofaWachoviabranchandinacommuting
U
zone. Market share is demeaned by the commuting zone average and I report Epanechnikov-kernel 95% conﬁdence intervals reported. The S
E
estimates show that Wachovia’s market share is signiﬁcantly higher in census tracts closer to Wachovia branches for both home purchase H
and reﬁnancing loans, indicating the presence of spatial frictions. Household credit data are from HMDA with market shares constructed O
L
using the count of originated loans. Similar results hold if including purchase loans. Branch location data are from the FDIC and census
D
tract locations are from the Census. The number of observations is about 12,500.
C
R
Home Purchase Loans Refinancing Loans E
4 D
00 I
. T
5
0 A
0
. N
e e D
et Shar.002 et Shar RE
k k
ar ar A
M M
s  s  L
a’ a’
vi vi E
ho0 ho0 F
c c
a a F
W W
n  n  E
e i e i C
nc nc T
e2 e
Differ−.00 Differ SO
F
5
00 T
4 −. H
0
0 E
−.
0 1 2 3 4 0 1 2 3 4 F
Miles from Wachovia Branch Miles from Wachovia Branch
I
kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .72, pwidth = 1.07 kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .52, pwidth = .77 N
A
N
C
I
A
L
3
0
----------------CC
RH
IA
Figure 1.8: Census Tract Household Credit Growth and Distance from Nearest Wachovia Branch S
IP
ST
Note: These ﬁgures plot local polynomial smoothed estimates of the growth in the number of loan originations in a census tract as a E
function of that tract’s distance to the nearest Wachovia branch: Lˆ = f(d )+e where d is the distance in miles of the census tract to R
i i i i
the nearest Wachovia branch. I limit the sample to all census tracts within four miles of a Wachovia branch. Loan growth is demeaned by 1.
the commuting zone average and Epanechnikov-kernel 95% conﬁdence intervals reported. The estimates show that from 2002-2006 there is
H
no clear relationship between loan growth and proximity to Wachovia. From 2007 to 2010 census tracts close to Wachovia experienced less O
growth relative to census tracts three to four miles for both home purchase and reﬁnancing loans. The diﬀerences between census tracts U
S
within a mile of Wachovia and census tracts four to ﬁve miles away from a Wachovia are economically signiﬁcant: about two percentage E
H
points for home purchase loans and one percentage point for reﬁnance loans. These results again indicate the presence of spatial frictions
O
that limit substitution from Wachovia to other lenders. Household credit data are from HMDA with market shares constructed using the L
count of originated loans. Similar results hold if including purchase loans. Branch location data are from the FDIC and census tract D
locationsarefromtheCensus. Thenumberofobservationsfrom2002-2006forhomepurchaseloansis8,838andforreﬁnancingloans9,141, C
R
where the diﬀerence comes from dropping outliers. In 2007-2010 the number of observations is about 8,692 for home purchase loans and
E
8,892 for reﬁnancing loans. D
I
T
Home Purchase Loans 2002−2006 Refinancing Loans 2002−2006 A
1 1 N
ate. ate. D
R5 R
wth .0 wth 0 RE
o o
Gr0 Gr A
elative −.05 elative −.1 LE
R1 R2 F
−. −. F
0 1 2 3 4 0 1 2 3 4 E
Miles from Wachovia Branch Miles from Wachovia Branch C
T
S
Home Purchase Loans 2007−2010 Refinancing Loans 2007−2010
O
2 2
ate.0 ate.0 F
R R T
wth .01 wth .01 H
Gro Gro E
e 0 e 0 F
v v
Relati−.01 Relati−.01 INA
N
0 1 2 3 4 0 1 2 3 4
C
Miles from Wachovia Branch Miles from Wachovia Branch
I
A
L
3
1
----------------CC
RH
IA
S
IP
ST
E
R
1
Figure 1.9: Exposure to Wachovia and Trends in Household Credit, Non-tradable Employment, and House Prices .
H
Note: This ﬁgure plots coeﬃcients from repeated cross-sectional regressions of home purchase credit, nontradable employment, and house O
prices all relative to 2007 on exposure to Wachovia: Outcome =α +β Wachovia Exposure +(cid:15) . Wachovia exposure is measured as U
it,2007 t t i it S
Wachovia’saveragemarketshareinhomepurchaseandreﬁnancecreditfrom2005-2006. ThereislittleevidencethatexposuretoWachovia E
is associated with a trend in any of these outcomes prior to 2007. In 2008 home purchase growth begins to fall sharply in counties with H
O
more exposure to Wachovia while nontradable employment and house price growth begin to fall sharply in 2009. See the text for details
L
on the data sources. The sample is limited to counties in the South and East with at least 50,000 residents and CCP data. State-clustered D
95% conﬁdence intervals are reported. C
R
E
Home Purchase Credit Non−tradable Employment House Prices D
1 I
T
1
5
A
N
D
0 R
0 E
%) %) %) A
7 ( 7 ( 7 ( L
0 0 0
e to 200 e to 20 e to 20−1 EF
ativ ativ ativ F
el el el E
R R−1 R2 C
− T
S
O
F
3
5 − T
−
2 H
−
2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 E
year year year
F
I
N
A
N
C
I
A
L
3
2
----------------CC
RH
IA
S
IP
ST
E
R
Figure 1.10: Eﬀect of Exposure to Wachovia on Household Credit Growth 1
.
Note: This ﬁgure plots Wachovia exposure, measured as Wachovia’s average market share of home purchase and reﬁnance mortgages from H
O
2005-2006 against the county-level growth rate of home purchase mortgages from 2007-2010. The right ﬁgure removes state averages from
U
credit growth. Counties with more exposure to Wachovia tended to have signiﬁcantly lower mortgage growth, suggesting more negative S
E
shocks to credit supply in these counties. The bivariate regression line is plotted in red and has a strongly negative slope. The sample is H
limitedtocountiesintheSouthandEastwithatleast50,000residentsandCCPdata. AlldataarefromHMDA.Observationsareweighted O
L
with a counties population in 2006.
D
C
.5 1 R
E
D
E I
F T
e 
h 2007−20100 2010 Net of Stat.5 ANDRE
wt 7− A
o 0
Gr 20 L
edit  wth  E
ousehold Cr−.5 d Credit Gro0 FFECT
H ol
h S
e
s
u O
o
H F
T
−1 −.5 HE
0 .05 .1 .15 0 .05 .1 .15
Wachovia Exposure Wachovia Exposure F
I
N
A
N
C
I
A
L
3
3
----------------CC
RH
IA
S
IP
ST
E
R
1
.
Figure 1.11: Wachovia and Household Credit Growth 2007-2010 in Large Counties, Semiparametric H
O
U
Note: ThisﬁgureplotsthenonparametricrelationshipbetweenWachoviaexposureandcreditgrowthnetofstateﬁxedeﬀectsandmortgage
S
leverage. Wachovia exposure is measuresd as Wachovia’s average market share of non-reﬁnance mortgages from 2005-2006. The left ﬁgures E
H
plotsexposureandthecounty-levelgrowthrateofhomepurchasemortgagesandtherightﬁgureplotsexposureagainstreﬁnancemortgages
O
from 2007-2010. Counties with more exposure to Wachovia tended to have signiﬁcantly lower growth in both types of credit and the L
D
relationship appears to be very close to linear. The sample is limited to counties in the South and East with at least 100,000 residents and
CCP data. All data are from HMDA. C
R
E
0 1.5 D
I
T
A
me Purchase Credit Growth 2007−2010−.6−.4−.2 Refinance Credit Growth 2007−20100.51 NDREALEFFEC
Ho −.5 TS
O
F
−.8 −1 T
0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 H
Wachovia Exposure Wachovia Exposure
E
F
I
N
A
N
C
I
A
L
3
4
----------------CC
RH
IA
S
IP
ST
E
R
1
.
Figure 1.12: Wachovia and Employment Growth 2007-2010 in Large Counties, Semiparametric H
O
U
Note: This ﬁgure plots the nonparametric relationship between Wachovia exposure and employment growth net of state ﬁxed eﬀects and
S
mortgage leverage. Wachovia exposure is measuresd as Wachovia’s average market share of non-reﬁnance mortgages from 2005-2006. The E
H
leftﬁguresplotsexposureandthecounty-levelgrowthrateofhomepurchasemortgagesandtherightﬁgureplotsexposureagainstreﬁnance
O
mortgages from 2007-2010. Counties with more exposure to Wachovia tended to have signiﬁcantly lower growth in both types of credit and L
D
the relationship appears to be very close to linear. The sample is limited to counties in the South and East with at least 100,000 residents
and CCP data. All data are from HMDA. C
R
E
.1 .1 D
I
T
A
0
Growth 2007−2010 wth 2007−20100 NDREA
mployment  oyment Gro LEF
ble E−.1 Empl−.1 FE
ntrada Total  CT
o
N S
O
F
2 2
−. −. T
0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 H
Wachovia Exposure Wachovia Exposure
E
F
I
N
A
N
C
I
A
L
3
5
----------------CC
RH
IA
S
IP
ST
E
Figure 1.13: Household and Firm Credit from Wachovia and Market
R
1
Note: This ﬁgure plots credit ﬂows and credit stocks on commercial bank balance sheets for Wachovia and the broader market, all .
normalized to be one in 2005. The left panel shows that home mortgage originations and purchases from Wachovia declined signiﬁcantly H
and diﬀerentially over the crisis. However, small business originations and purchases from Wachovia mirrored the aggregate trend almost O
U
exactly. The right panel plots the quarterly stock of household and ﬁrm credit on bank balance sheets calculated from all bank call reports.
S
Wachovia’s stock of ﬁrm loans continued to grow until the fourth quarter of 2008 while Wachovia’s holdings of household credit began to E
H
decline by late 2007. Both ﬁgures suggest Wachovia’s credit contraction was largely concentrated in household credit. I adjust Wachovia’s
O
stock of household credit to smooth the incorporation of GWF’s stock of loans. Flow data are calculated from the HMDA and CRA data. L
D
Household lending is composed of loans to individuals and loans secured by real estate. Firm lending is composed of all commercial and
industrial loans. C
R
E
Credit Flows Credit Stocks D
6 I
2 1. T
1.
A
N
1 D
4
1. R
8 E
.
A
L
6
. 2 E
1. F
F
4
. E
C
T
2
. 1 S
O
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2005q1 2005q3 2006q1 2006q3 2007q1 2007q3 2008q1 2008q3
F
Time Time
T
H
Wachovia Small Business Wachovia Home Mortgage Wachovia Firm Wachovia Household
E
F
Market Small Business Market Home Mortgage Market Firm Market Household I
N
A
N
C
I
A
L
3
6
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 37
Table 1.1: Summary Statistics
Note: This table gives summary statistics for all counties with at least 50,000 residents and CCP observ-
ables. All statistics with a year range are growth rates between those years. Construction, tradable, and
non-tradable employment are classiﬁed according to Mian and Suﬁ (2014). See the text for data sources.
Estimates are weighted using county population in 2006.
mean sd count
Total Employment 2007-2010 -0.07 0.05 779
Construction Employment 2007-2010 -0.20 0.13 779
Non-tradable Employment 2007-2010 -0.03 0.06 779
Tradable Employment 2007-2010 -0.16 0.13 779
Construction Share 2006 0.12 0.04 779
Non-tradable Share 2006 0.17 0.04 779
Tradable Share 2006 0.10 0.06 779
Home Purchase Credit 2007-2010 -0.46 0.12 779
Reﬁnance Credit 2007-2010 0.19 0.57 771
Small Business Credit 2007-2010 -0.46 0.13 779
Home Purchase Credit 2002-2006 0.62 0.52 779
Reﬁnance Credit 2002-2006 -0.16 0.50 779
Mortgage Leverage 2002-2006 0.44 0.21 779
Mortgage Leverage 2006 1.32 0.49 779
House Prices 2002-2006 0.45 0.30 579
House Prices 2007-2010 -0.18 0.14 604
Wachovia Home Purchase Share 2002-2006 0.01 0.02 779
Wachovia Reﬁnance Share 2002-2006 0.02 0.02 779
Wachovia Average Share 2002-2006 0.02 0.02 779
Table 1.2: Summary Statistics - East and South
Note: This table gives summary statistics for counties in the East and South with at least 50,000 residents
and CCP observables. All statistics with a year range are growth rates between those years. Construction,
tradable, and non-tradable employment are classiﬁed according to Mian and Suﬁ (2014). See the text for
data sources. Estimates are weighted using county population in 2006.
mean sd count
Total Employment 2007-2010 -0.06 0.05 478
Construction Employment 2007-2010 -0.17 0.13 478
Non-tradable Employment 2007-2010 -0.02 0.06 478
Tradable Employment 2007-2010 -0.16 0.14 478
Construction Share 2006 0.11 0.04 478
Non-tradable Share 2006 0.18 0.04 478
Tradable Share 2006 0.09 0.06 478
Home Purchase Credit 2007-2010 -0.46 0.14 478
Reﬁnance Credit 2007-2010 0.21 0.58 477
Small Business Credit 2007-2010 -0.50 0.11 478
Home Purchase Credit 2002-2006 0.67 0.53 478
Reﬁnance Credit 2002-2006 -0.13 0.51 478
Mortgage Leverage 2002-2006 0.41 0.20 478
Mortgage Leverage 2006 1.14 0.35 478
House Prices 2002-2006 0.44 0.27 342
House Prices 2007-2010 -0.14 0.13 360
Wachovia Home Purchase Share 2002-2006 0.02 0.02 478
Wachovia Reﬁnance Share 2002-2006 0.03 0.03 478
Wachovia Average Share 2002-2006 0.03 0.02 478
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 38
Table 1.3: Joint Correlation Between Wachovia Exposure and Observables
Note: ThistablereportsOLSestimatesofWachoviaexposurejointlyregressedonvariouscountyobservables:
(cid:80)
Wachovia Exposure =α+ β X +(cid:15) . The regressions show there is no systematic relationship between
i j j ji i
exposuretoWachoviaandmanyofthepre-crisisobservableslinkedtothehousingboomandbust. Imeasure
exposure with Wachovia’s average market share in 2005-2006 of home purchase and reﬁnance mortgages
within the county. The only robust relationship is the negative association with the share of lending done
by HUD-regulated lenders. See the paper for data sources and deﬁnitions. The sample is restricted to all
counties in the South and East with CCP controls and at least 50,000 residents. Pair bootstrap-t used
to construct symmetric p-values and 95% conﬁdence intervals clustered at the state level. Estimates are
weighted using county population in 2006.
(1) (2) (3) (4)
β /p/(CI) β /p/(CI) β /p/(CI) β /p/(CI)
Non-tradable Employment 2002-2006 0.026 0.011 0.037 0.010
0.020 0.246 0.034 0.114
(0.004, 0.049) (-0.009, 0.030) (0.003, 0.070) (-0.002, 0.022)
Construction Employment 2002-2006 -0.000 0.003 -0.000 0.002
0.208 0.022 0.340 0.086
(-0.004, 0.003) (0.001, 0.006) (-0.004, 0.004) (-0.001, 0.005)
Mortgage Leverage 2006 0.012 -0.004 0.011 -0.007
0.004 0.784 0.086 0.714
(0.004, 0.020) (-0.025, 0.017) (-0.001, 0.023) (-0.037, 0.023)
Construction Share 2006 0.017 -0.074 -0.030 -0.110
0.746 0.178 0.982 0.134
(-0.072, 0.106) (-0.200, 0.052) (-0.131, 0.072) (-0.252, 0.033)
HUD-regulated Share 2002-2006 -0.088 -0.032 -0.119 -0.058
0.002 0.002 0.004 0.004
(-0.143, -0.032) (-0.143, -0.032) (-0.185, -0.054) (-0.185, -0.054)
Population 2002-2006 -0.013 -0.010 -0.003 0.021
0.956 0.956 0.174 0.174
(-0.065, 0.038) (-0.065, 0.038) (-0.075, 0.068) (-0.075, 0.068)
Home Purchase Credit 2002-2006 -0.001 -0.002 0.001 -0.005
0.620 0.328 0.554 0.024
(-0.006, 0.004) (-0.005, 0.001) (-0.006, 0.008) (-0.009, -0.001)
House Prices 2002-2006 -0.005 0.015
0.916 0.778
(-0.023, -0.023) (-0.040, -0.040)
FE – State – State
N 478 478 342 342
Clusters 25 25 23 23
R2 0.072 0.680 0.083 0.698
F-stat 4.070 9.690 1.864 14.506
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 39
d eayaet
Table1.4:EﬀectofExposuretoWachoviaonHomePurchaseandReﬁnanceCreditGrowth2007-2010 Note:Thistablereportspointestimates,p-values,and95%conﬁdenceintervalsforhouseholdcreditgrowthatthecountylevel(measure asnon-reﬁnancemortgagegrowth)regressedonexposuretoWachovia:L=α+βWachoviaExposure+θX+(cid:15).Imeasureexposur(cid:98)iiiiwithWachovia’saveragemarketsharein2005-2006tohomepurchaseandreﬁnancemortgageswithinthecounty.ExposuretoWachovihadalargeandrobusteﬀectonbothtypesofhouseholdcreditgrowthacrosscounties.TheR-squaredsuggestsWachoviaisareasonablstronginstrument.ThebaselineestimateincolumnoneshowsthatincreasingexposuretoWachoviabyonepercentagepointleadstodecreaseinhouseholdcreditof2.4%overthreeyears.Thisestimateisrobusttocontrolsandtoalesserextentstateﬁxedeﬀects.ThsampleisrestrictedtoallcountiesintheSouthandEastwithCCPcontrolsandatleast50,000residents.Pairbootstrap-tusedtoconstrucsymmetricp-valuesand95%conﬁdenceintervalsclusteredatthestatelevel.Estimatesareweightedusingcountypopulationin2006. (1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)PurchasePurchasePurchaseReﬁnanceReﬁnanceReﬁnanceβ/p/(CI)β/p/(CI)β/p/(CI)β/p/(CI)β/p/(CI)β/p/(CI) WachoviaAverageShare-2.357-2.168-1.621-3.732-2.066-2.6150.0000.0000.2300.0480.3200.738(-2.925,-1.789)(-2.741,-1.594)(-5.175,1.933)(-7.361,-0.104)(-5.467,1.335)(-10.470,5.240)MortgageLeverage2006-0.092-0.026-0.5770.1510.0780.8960.0040.898(-0.192,0.008)(-0.130,0.077)(-0.983,-0.170)(-0.465,0.767)ConstructionShare2006-0.1310.014-0.708-0.5900.9940.2260.8460.736(-0.588,0.327)(-0.291,0.318)(-2.646,1.230)(-2.660,1.481)HUD-regulatedShare2006-0.401-0.4580.490-1.8590.0060.0000.9560.020(-0.693,-0.108)(-0.691,-0.224)(-1.116,2.096)(-3.324,-0.395)NontradableEmployment2002-2006-0.2000.013-0.1880.5040.0260.4180.7900.002(-0.370,-0.030)(-0.116,0.142)(-1.246,0.869)(0.168,0.839) FE––State––StateN478478478477477477Clusters252525252525R20.1540.3110.6260.0210.1470.603RobustF-stat32.66712.58613.1270.9521.6555.988
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 40
2 ) )
1 3 2
Table1.5:EﬀectofWachoviaExposureonRetailExpenditures,HouseSales,andHousePrices2007-2010 Note:Thistablereportsregressionpointestimates,p-values,and95%conﬁdenceintervalsoftherelationshipbetweenexposuretoWachoviaandretailexpenditure,housesales,andhousepricegrowthatthecountylevel:Outcome=α+βWachoviaExposure+θX+(cid:15).ImeasureiiiiexposurewithWachovia’saveragemarketsharein2005-2006tohomepurchaseandreﬁnancemortgageswithinthecounty.CountiesexposedtoWachoviaexperiencedlargerdeclinesinretailsalesandhousesalesgrowthandthisresultisveryrobusttousingonlywithinstatevariation.HousepricesalsoappeartodeclineinresponsetoWachoviaexposure,butonlywhenthenthehorizonisextendedto2012.ThesampleisrestrictedtoallcountiesintheSouthandEastwithCCPcontrolsandatleast50,000residents.Pairbootstrap-tusedtoconstructsymmetricp-valuesand95%conﬁdenceintervalsclusteredatthestatelevel.Estimatesareweightedusingcountypopulationin2006. (1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7)RetailRetailHomeSalesHomeSalesHPI2007-2010HPI2007-2012HPI2007-20β/p/(CI)β/p/(CI)β/p/(CI)β/p/(CI)β/p/(CI)β/p/(CI)β/p/(CI) WachoviaAverageShare-0.747-0.983-1.877-2.143-0.373-1.209-1.2990.0000.0000.0000.0000.2720.0060.382(-1.052,-0.443)(-1.390,-0.576)(-2.754,-0.999)(-3.589,-0.697)(-0.989,0.243)(-2.164,-0.434)(-4.471,1.87MortgageLeverage2006-0.041-0.0290.1670.067-0.252-0.253-0.1340.0000.3260.0440.6420.0000.0020.074(-0.063,-0.018)(-0.084,0.026)(0.010,0.323)(-0.133,0.266)(-0.332,-0.173)(-0.200,-0.067)(-0.279,0.01 FE–State–State––StateN471471356356360360360Clusters25252323232323R20.0850.2110.1260.4940.4350.3970.706F-stat18.38215.0206.2279.0717.10711.3666.596
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 41
Table1.6:EﬀectofWachoviaExposureonNontradableEmploymentandPayroll2007-2010 Note:Thistablereportsregressionpointestimates,p-values,and95%conﬁdenceintervalsoftherelationshipbetweenexposuretoWachoviaandnontradableemploymentandpayrollgrowthatthecountylevel:E=α+βWachoviaExposure+θX+(cid:15).Unlessotherwisenoted(cid:98)iiiitheoutcomesaregrowthratesfrom2007to2010.ImeasureexposurewithWachovia’smarketsharein2005-2006ofhomepurchaseandreﬁnancemortgageswithinthecounty.CountiesexposedtoWachoviaexperiencedlargerdeclinesinnontradableemploymentandpayrollgrowth.Thisresultisrobusttostateﬁxedeﬀects,althoughsomeprecisionislost.Seethetextforvariableconstruction.ThesampleisrestrictedtoallcountiesintheSouthandEastwithCCPcontrolsandatleast50,000residents.Pairbootstrap-tusedtoconstructsymmetricp-valuesand95%conﬁdenceintervalsclusteredatthestatelevel.Estimatesareweightedusingcountypopulationin2006. (1)(2)(3)(4)EmploymentEmploymentPayrollsPayrollsβ/p/(CI)β/p/(CI)β/p/(CI)β/p/(CI) WachoviaExposure-0.696-0.437-0.684-0.5460.0000.1380.0040.042(-1.030,-0.361)(-1.069,0.196)(-1.166,-0.203)(-1.073,-0.020)MortgageLeverage2006-0.0320.015-0.040-0.0360.0060.2640.0060.436(-0.049,-0.016)(-0.014,0.045)(-0.070,-0.010)(-0.116,0.043) FE–State–StateN478478478478Clusters25252525R20.1100.3120.0460.124F-stat7.8283.6409.8544.572
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 42
mploymentandPayroll2007-2010 rvalsoftherelationshipbetweenexposuretoWachoviahoviaExposure+θX+(cid:15).Unlessotherwisenotedtheiiirketsharein2005-2006ofhomepurchaseandreﬁnanceexperiencelargerdeclinesinconstructionemploymenteﬁxedeﬀects.Seethetextforvariableconstruction.ndatleast50,000residents.Pairbootstrap-tusedtoel.Estimatesareweightedusingcountypopulationin (3)(4)PayrollsPayrollsβ/p/(CI)β/p/(CI) -2.086-0.5310.0040.042(-1.166,-0.203)(-1.073,-0.020)-0.186-0.0850.0060.436(-0.070,-0.010)(-0.116,0.043) –State47847825250.2540.47619.0857.999
Table1.7:EﬀectofWachoviaExposureonConstructionE Note:Thistablereportsregressionpointestimates,p-values,and95%conﬁdenceinteandconstructionemploymentandpayrollgrowthatthecountylevel:E=α+βWac(cid:98)ioutcomesaregrowthratesfrom2007to2010.ImeasureexposurewithWachovia’smamortgageswithinthecounty.CountiesexposedtoWachoviaexperiencedappeartoandpayrollgrowth,buttheestimatesarereducedsigniﬁcantlywhenincludingstatThesampleisrestrictedtoallcountiesintheSouthandEastwithCCPcontrolsaconstructsymmetricp-valuesand95%conﬁdenceintervalsclusteredatthestatelev2006. (1)(2)EmploymentEmploymentβ/p/(CI)β/p/(CI) WachoviaExposure-1.509-0.3720.0000.696(-2.019,-0.999)(-2.011,1.267)MortgageLeverage2006-0.170-0.0760.0000.006(-0.220,-0.120)(-0.124,-0.028) FE–StateN478478Clusters2525R20.2920.475F-stat17.5306.837
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 43
aseyds
07-2010 retoWachoviX+(cid:15).Unlesii5-2006ofhomreisessentiallpleisrestrictemetricp-value (4)Payrollsβ/p/(CI) -0.1490.276(-3.758,3.460)0.0090.624(-0.044,0.062) State473250.3460.064
Table1.8:EﬀectofWachoviaExposureonNonresidentialConstructionEmploymentandPayroll20 Note:Thistablereportsregressionpointestimates,p-values,and95%conﬁdenceintervalsoftherelationshipbetweenexposuandnonresidentialconstructionemploymentandpayrollgrowthatthecountylevel:E=α+βWachoviaExposure+θ(cid:98)iiotherwisenotedtheoutcomesaregrowthratesfrom2007to2010.ImeasureexposurewithWachovia’smarketsharein200purchaseandreﬁnancemortgageswithinthecounty.ThistableshowsthatoncestateﬁxedeﬀectsaretakenintoaccountthenorelationshipbetweenemploymentandpayrollgrowthinnonresidentialconstructionandexposuretoWachovia.ThesamtoallcountiesintheSouthandEastwithCCPcontrolsandatleast50,000residents.Pairbootstrap-tusedtoconstructsymand95%conﬁdenceintervalsclusteredatthestatelevel.Estimatesareweightedusingcountypopulationin2006. (1)(2)(3)EmploymentEmploymentPayrollsβ/p/(CI)β/p/(CI)β/p/(CI) WachoviaExposure-1.446-0.078-2.1970.0000.1800.000(-2.044,-0.848)(-2.875,2.718)(-3.030,-1.365)MortgageLeverage2006-0.142-0.037-0.1380.0000.1600.004(-0.206,-0.078)(-0.085,0.012)(-0.234,-0.043) FE–State–N474474473Clusters252525R20.1830.4140.118F-stat10.9422.27012.782
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 44
aseyds
nEmploymentandPayroll2007-2010 alsoftherelationshipbetweenexposuretoWachoviE=α+βWachoviaExposure+θX+(cid:15).Unles(cid:98)iiiiwithWachovia’smarketsharein2005-2006ofhomxedeﬀectsaretakenintoaccountthereisessentiallandexposuretoWachovia.Thesampleisrestricteairbootstrap-tusedtoconstructsymmetricp-valuecountypopulationin2006. (3)(4)PayrollsPayrollsβ/p/(CI)β/p/(CI) -2.295-0.8110.0000.240(-2.860,-1.730)(-2.202,0.580)-0.208-0.1280.0000.004(-0.256,-0.160)(-0.200,-0.056) –State47847825250.4050.57227.6958.166
Table1.9:EﬀectofWachoviaExposureonResidentialConstructio Note:Thistablereportsregressionpointestimates,p-values,and95%conﬁdenceintervandnonresidentialconstructionemploymentandpayrollgrowthatthecountylevel:otherwisenotedtheoutcomesaregrowthratesfrom2007to2010.Imeasureexposurepurchaseandreﬁnancemortgageswithinthecounty.ThistableshowsthatoncestateﬁnorelationshipbetweenemploymentandpayrollgrowthinnonresidentialconstructiontoallcountiesintheSouthandEastwithCCPcontrolsandatleast50,000residents.Pand95%conﬁdenceintervalsclusteredatthestatelevel.Estimatesareweightedusing (1)(2)EmploymentEmploymentβ/p/(CI)β/p/(CI) WachoviaExposure-1.797-0.6970.0000.020(-2.273,-1.321)(-1.283,-0.110)MortgageLeverage2006-0.177-0.0900.0000.014(-0.221,-0.134)(-0.156,-0.025) FE–StateN477477Clusters2525R20.4090.588F-stat21.4808.013
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 45
aseyds
retoWachoviX+(cid:15).Unlesii5-2006ofhomreisessentiallpleisrestrictemetricp-value (4)Payrollsβ/p/(CI) 0.6420.856(-3.721,5.005)-0.0320.850(-0.211,0.146) State450250.1100.226
entandPayroll2007-2010 therelationshipbetweenexposuα+βWachoviaExposure+θiWachovia’smarketsharein200ﬀectsaretakenintoaccountthexposuretoWachovia.Thesamotstrap-tusedtoconstructsymtypopulationin2006. (3)Payrollsβ/p/(CI) -0.9390.094(-2.065,0.187)-0.1240.026(-0.236,-0.012) –450250.0312.693
Table1.10:EﬀectofWachoviaExposureonTradablesEmploym Note:Thistablereportsregressionpointestimates,p-values,and95%conﬁdenceintervalsofandnonresidentialconstructionemploymentandpayrollgrowthatthecountylevel:E=(cid:98)iotherwisenotedtheoutcomesaregrowthratesfrom2007to2010.Imeasureexposurewithpurchaseandreﬁnancemortgageswithinthecounty.ThistableshowsthatoncestateﬁxedenorelationshipbetweenemploymentandpayrollgrowthinnonresidentialconstructionandetoallcountiesintheSouthandEastwithCCPcontrolsandatleast50,000residents.Pairboand95%conﬁdenceintervalsclusteredatthestatelevel.Estimatesareweightedusingcoun (1)(2)EmploymentEmploymentβ/p/(CI)β/p/(CI) WachoviaAverageShare-0.317-0.8650.4640.450(-0.948,0.315)(-3.499,1.770)MortgageLeverage2006-0.0110.0010.6760.082(-0.081,0.060)(-0.091,0.094) FE–StateN478478Clusters2525R20.0040.129F-stat0.3241.126
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 46
aseyds
2010 retoWachoviX+(cid:15).Unlesii5-2006ofhomreisessentiallpleisrestrictemetricp-value (4)Payrollsβ/p/(CI) -0.3540.534(-1.244,0.537)-0.0230.106(-0.050,0.004) State478250.2932.028
ExcludingTradables2007- therelationshipbetweenexposuα+βWachoviaExposure+θiWachovia’smarketsharein200ﬀectsaretakenintoaccountthexposuretoWachovia.Thesamotstrap-tusedtoconstructsymtypopulationin2006. (3)Payrollsβ/p/(CI) -1.0410.000(-1.366,-0.715)-0.0610.000(-0.088,-0.033) –478250.16132.580
yroll alsofE=(cid:98)iwithxedeandeairbocoun
Table1.11:EﬀectofWachoviaExposureonEmploymentandPa Note:Thistablereportsregressionpointestimates,p-values,and95%conﬁdenceintervandnonresidentialconstructionemploymentandpayrollgrowthatthecountylevel:otherwisenotedtheoutcomesaregrowthratesfrom2007to2010.Imeasureexposurepurchaseandreﬁnancemortgageswithinthecounty.ThistableshowsthatoncestateﬁnorelationshipbetweenemploymentandpayrollgrowthinnonresidentialconstructiontoallcountiesintheSouthandEastwithCCPcontrolsandatleast50,000residents.Pand95%conﬁdenceintervalsclusteredatthestatelevel.Estimatesareweightedusing (1)(2)EmploymentEmploymentβ/p/(CI)β/p/(CI) WachoviaAverageShare-0.631-0.2950.0000.104(-0.880,-0.382)(-0.642,0.051)MortgageLeverage2006-0.045-0.0030.0000.534(-0.062,-0.028)(-0.032,0.026) FE–StateN478478Clusters2525R20.2010.350F-stat16.3801.784
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 47
aseyds
retoWachoviX+(cid:15).Unlesii5-2006ofhomreisessentiallpleisrestrictemetricp-value (4)Payrollsβ/p/(CI) -0.2880.598(-1.183,0.608)-0.0240.056(-0.049,0.001) State478250.2912.561
tandPayroll2007-2010 therelationshipbetweenexposuα+βWachoviaExposure+θiWachovia’smarketsharein200ﬀectsaretakenintoaccountthexposuretoWachovia.Thesamotstrap-tusedtoconstructsymtypopulationin2006. (3)Payrollsβ/p/(CI) -1.0030.000(-1.344,-0.662)-0.0630.002(-0.092,-0.035) –478250.16028.899
Table1.12:EﬀectofWachoviaExposureonTotalEmploymen Note:Thistablereportsregressionpointestimates,p-values,and95%conﬁdenceintervalsofandnonresidentialconstructionemploymentandpayrollgrowthatthecountylevel:E=(cid:98)iotherwisenotedtheoutcomesaregrowthratesfrom2007to2010.Imeasureexposurewithpurchaseandreﬁnancemortgageswithinthecounty.ThistableshowsthatoncestateﬁxedenorelationshipbetweenemploymentandpayrollgrowthinnonresidentialconstructionandetoallcountiesintheSouthandEastwithCCPcontrolsandatleast50,000residents.Pairboand95%conﬁdenceintervalsclusteredatthestatelevel.Estimatesareweightedusingcoun (1)(2)EmploymentEmploymentβ/p/(CI)β/p/(CI) WachoviaAverageShare-0.669-0.3340.0000.204(-0.896,-0.441)(-0.838,0.169)MortgageLeverage2006-0.0370.0010.0000.232(-0.054,-0.019)(-0.020,0.022) FE–StateN478478Clusters2525R20.1930.351F-stat13.1232.110
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 48
eehefshd
Table1.13:WachoviaExposureintheHouseholdandFirmCreditMarket2007-2010 Note:Thistablereportsregressionpointestimates,p-values,and95%conﬁdenceintervalsoftherelationshipbetweentypesofexposurtoWachoviaandtypesofcreditgrowthatthecountylevel:L=α+βWachoviaExposure+θX+(cid:15).Thistableshowsthatexposur(cid:98)iiiitoWachoviainthesmallbusinesscreditmarkethasnopredictivepowerofdeclinesinhouseholdcredit.ExposuretoWachoviainbothouseholdandﬁrmcreditcausesdeclinesinﬁrmcredit.WachoviaExposureismeasuredasWachovia’smarketshareinthehomepurchasandreﬁnancemarkets.HighWachovia(CRA)andHighWachovia(HMDA)areindicatorsforwhetherornotacountyisinthetophalfoexposure.Alternativespeciﬁcationsgivesimliarresults.Allspeciﬁcationsincludestateﬁxedeﬀects.Unlessotherwisenotedtheoutcomearegrowthratesfrom2007to2010.ImeasureexposureinseveralwaysThesampleisrestrictedtoallcountiesintheSouthandEastwitCCPcontrolsandatleast50,000residents.Pairbootstrap-tusedtoconstructsymmetricp-valuesand95%conﬁdenceintervalsclustereatthestatelevel.Estimatesareweightedusingcountypopulationin2006. (1)(2)(3)(4)(5)HomePurchaseHomePurchaseFirmCreditFirmCreditFirmCreditβ/p/(CI)β/p/(CI)β/p/(CI)β/p/(CI)β/p/(CI) WachoviaExposure-1.667-1.1730.2040.140(-4.675,1.342)(-2.751,0.406)MortgageLeverage2006-0.060-0.066-0.076-0.087-0.0890.2280.0740.5080.0480.004(-0.170,0.050)(-0.142,0.009)(-0.375,0.182)(-0.172,-0.001)(-0.156,-0.022)HighWachovia(CRA)-0.0020.023-0.097-0.064-0.0500.1840.4120.5080.3120.382(-0.063,0.058)(-0.022,0.068)(-0.375,0.182)(-0.203,0.075)(-0.166,0.066)HighWachovia(HMDA)-0.110-0.0710.0220.120(-0.191,-0.029)(-0.162,0.019) FEStateStateStateStateStateN484486480478480Clusters2525252525R20.6050.6190.5440.5550.562F-stat3.43318.0895.6045.4665.790
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 49
assas%
0 ofexposuretoWachoviutcomesaregrowthrateandreﬁnancemortgageRA)andHighWachovirestrictedtoallcountiemetricp-valuesand95 (4)Totalβ/p/(CI) 0.0030.548(-0.017,0.022)-0.0020.426(-0.023,0.019)-0.0200.120(-0.046,0.007) State478250.3562.338
Table1.14:WhichTypeofCreditMattersforEmploymentGrowth2007-201 Note:Thistablereportspointestimates,p-values,and95%conﬁdenceintervalsoftherelationshipbetweentypesandemploymentgrowthatthecountylevel:E=α+βWachoviaExposure+θX+(cid:15).Unlessotherwisenotedtheo(cid:98)iiiifrom2007to2010.ImeasureWachoviaExposurewithWachovia’smarketsharein2005-2006ofhomepurchasewithinthecounty.FirmexposureisWachovia’sshareofthesmallbusinesslendingmarket.HighWachovia(CHMDAareindicatorsforacountyhaveingabove-medianexposuretoWachoviainthatmarket.ThesampleisintheSouthandEastwithCCPcontrolsandatleast50,000residents.Pairbootstrap-tusedtoconstructsymconﬁdenceintervalsclusteredatthestatelevel.Estimatesareweightedusingcountypopulationin2006. (1)(2)(3)NontradablesNontradablesTotalβ/p/(CI)β/p/(CI)β/p/(CI) WachoviaAverageShare-0.419-0.2640.1520.466(-1.017,0.179)(-0.981,0.454)MortgageLeverage20060.0160.0170.0030.2200.1500.564(-0.009,0.041)(-0.008,0.042)(-0.018,0.023)HighWachovia(CRA)-0.002-0.001-0.0070.3300.2040.640(-0.023,0.020)(-0.019,0.017)(-0.024,0.011)HighWachovia(HMDA)-0.0200.246(-0.062,0.022) FEStateStateStateN478478478Clusters252525R20.3120.3110.352F-stat2.7972.9331.858
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 50
deets
oWachoviaanerwisenotedthfhomepurchasrolsandatleaslevel.Estimate (5)50+β/p/(CI) -0.7560.000(-0.991,-0.520)-0.0520.000(-0.071,-0.034) 486250.20015.009
owthbySize2007-2010 erelationshipbetweenexposuretaExposure+θX+(cid:15).Unlessothiiiovia’smarketsharein2005-2006oheSouthandEastwithCCPcontnceintervalsclusteredatthestate (4)20-49I)β/p/(CI) -0.7030.000285)(-0.958,-0.448)-0.0460.000026)(-0.065,-0.028) 486250.19216.087
mentGr rvalsofthβWachoviwithWachuntiesint5%conﬁde (3)10-19β/p/(C -0.5140.000(-0.744,-0.-0.0420.000(-0.058,-0. 486250.1487.707
posureandEstablish and95%conﬁdenceinteecountylevel:E=α+(cid:98)iureWachoviaExposurepleisrestrictedtoallcoymmetricp-valuesand9 (2)5-9β/p/(CI) -0.5270.000(-0.820,-0.235)-0.0370.000(-0.053,-0.020) 486250.1455.774
x hsms
Table1.15:WachoviaE Note:Thistablereportspointestimates,p-values,establishmentgrowthindiﬀerentsizecategoriesattoutcomesaregrowthratesfrom2007to2010.Imeaandreﬁnancemortgageswithinthecounty.Thesa50,000residents.Pairbootstrap-tusedtoconstructareweightedusingcountypopulationin2006. (1)1-4β/p/(CI) WachoviaAverageShare-0.4330.000(-0.711,-0.156)MortgageLeverage2006-0.0130.082(-0.028,0.002) N486Clusters25R20.085RobustF-stat3.323
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 51
handviaasovia’snthewithlevel.
Table1.16:EﬀectofSupply-drivenChangesinHouseholdCreditonTotalEmploymentGrowth2007-2010 Note:Thistablereportspointestimates,p-values,and95%conﬁdenceintervalsoftherelationshipbetweenhouseholdcreditgrwtoemploymentgrowthatthecountylevel:E=α+βL+θX+(cid:15).IreportOLSand2SLSestimateswhereIuseexposuretoWacho(cid:98)(cid:98)iiiianinstrumentalvariable.Unlessotherwisenotedtheoutcomesaregrowthratesfrom2007to2010.ImeasureexposurewithWachmarketsharein2005-2006ofhomepurchaseandreﬁnancemortgageswithinthecounty.ThesampleisrestrictedtoallcountiesiSouthandEastwithCCPcontrolsandatleast50,000residentsexceptwhen“Large”isindicated,whenitisrestrictedtocountiesatleast100,000residents.Pairbootstrap-tusedtoconstructsymmetricp-valuesand95%conﬁdenceintervalsclusteredatthestateEstimatesareweightedusingcountypopulationin2006. (1)(2)(3)(4)OLS2SLS2SLS2SLS-Largeγ/p/(CI)γ/p/(CI)γ/p/(CI)γ/p/(CI) HomePurchaseCredit2007-20100.1290.3140.2540.3230.0000.0000.0900.104(0.087,0.172)(0.211,0.417)(-0.068,0.576)(-0.114,0.761) FE––StateStateN486484484274Clusters25252525RobustF-stat29.7993.5234.268WeakIDP-value0.0010.2000.205
----------------CHAPTER 1. HOUSEHOLD CREDIT AND REAL EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 52
EmploymentGrowth2007-2010,Hetero- ationshipbetweenhouseholdcreditgrowthandmateswhereIuseexposuretoWachoviaasanto2010.ImeasureexposurewithWachovia’sThesampleisrestrictedtoallcountiesinthendicated,whenitisrestrictedtocountieswithconﬁdenceintervalsclusteredatthestatelevel. (3)(4)HighLeverageLowLeverageβ/p/(CI)β/p/(CI) 0.3240.3100.0360.004(0.036,0.613)(0.135,0.485) 24324125238.60635.4150.0150.006
ditonTotal ervalsoftherelport2SLSestiatesfrom2007hinthecounty.hen“Large”isivaluesand95% (2)wIncome/p/(CI) 0.3690.00050,0.589) 2411813.8370.003
Table1.17:EﬀectofSupply-drivenChangesinHouseholdCregeneity Note:Thistablereportspointestimates,p-values,and95%conﬁdenceintemploymentgrowthatthecountylevel:E=α+βL+θX+(cid:15).Ire(cid:98)(cid:98)iiiiinstrumentalvariable.Unlessotherwisenotedtheoutcomesaregrowthrmarketsharein2005-2006ofhomepurchaseandreﬁnancemortgageswitSouthandEastwithCCPcontrolsandatleast50,000residentsexceptwatleast100,000residents.Pairbootstrap-tusedtoconstructsymmetricp-Estimatesareweightedusingcountypopulationin2006 (1)HighIncomeLoβ/p/(CI)β HomePurchaseCredit2007-20100.2890.000(0.153,0.425)(0.1 N243Clusters24RobustF-stat25.545WeakIDP-value0.005
----------------53
Chapter 2
Accounting for Shocks to the
Household Credit Market
2.1 Introduction
In the ﬁrst chapter I provided evidence that shocks to household credit had large eﬀects on
household expenditures and employment. These estimates suggest that shocks to household
credit could have played an important role in the employment losses following the ﬁnancial
crisis. However, a proper accounting requires not only the elasticity of employment with
respect to these shocks, but also the size of the shock. In this chapter I provide an estimate
of the size of the shock to the household credit market. To estimate the size of the shock,
I non-parametrically identify lender-speciﬁc supply shocks to household credit using data
on lender-county credit ﬂows. My measured shock to a county is then the weighted sum of
the lender shocks to an area. I discuss the structure that validates this approach in more
detail below. With this shock and the elasticity of employment with respect to this measure,
it is straightforward to calculate the direct contribution of the household credit channel to
total employment losses. I ﬁnd that shocks to household credit caused at least 30 to 60%
of the observed decline in employment within the estimation sample. As I explain more
fully in Section 1.3, the elasticity necessary for this accounting (the elasticity of employment
with respect to the measured shock) is not the elasticity I estimate in the ﬁrst chapter
(the elasticity of employment with respect to household credit quantities). However, I show
that it is straightforward to recover this second elasticity using exposure to Wachovia as an
instrumental variable.
Relying on insights from index theory, I assume a ﬂexible functional form for the price of
household credit in a county. Doing so implies the functional form for the supply shock to
household credit: the true supply shock to a county is the weighted average of the passed-
through lender-speciﬁc cost shocks in that county. Constructing a measure of the shock
then reduces to measuring these lender cost shocks. I build on the approach of Greenstone
et al. (2012), and exploit the fact that many lenders operate in multiple counties, and
----------------CHAPTER 2. ACCOUNTING FOR SHOCKS TO THE HOUSEHOLD CREDIT
MARKET 54
that the households in counties borrow from multiple lenders. Related strategies have also
been employed by Amiti and Weinstein (2013), Chodorow-Reich (2014), and Niepmann and
Schmidt-Eisenlohr (2013). The intellectual precursor to this strategy within this literature is
Khwaja and Mian (2008) in that they used borrower-lender variation to control for demand
shocks, although they do not use it to construct supply-side shocks. This approach allows
me to use growth in lender-county credit ﬂows to estimate a ﬁxed eﬀect for each lender and
each county. A lender ﬁxed eﬀect is then the average change in credit ﬂows for that lender
across all borrower relationships, conditional on all other ﬁxed eﬀects. I expect this statistic
to reﬂect whether or not a lender is expanding or contracting credit to borrowers.
Using a simple model of credit markets with monopolistic competition, I provide a struc-
tural interpretation of these ﬁxed eﬀects. This also allows me to lay out and check iden-
tiﬁcation conditions that ensure a ﬁxed eﬀect is a measure of the lender’s cost shock and,
critically, is puriﬁed of demand shocks. The estimated ﬁxed eﬀects allow me to measure any
cost shock to lenders so long as it aﬀects equilibrium credit quantities. In other words, the
ﬁxed eﬀect measure of cost shocks is agnostic about the source of the cost shock. Alternative
approaches rely on a proxy for a speciﬁc cost shock (for example, liquidity measures or expo-
sure to Lehman Brothers) and so will only recover cost shocks related to that variable.1 In
these cases, it is generally unknown whether or not that speciﬁc proxy captures the majority
of cost shocks aﬀecting lenders. Therefore, the ﬁxed eﬀects provide a more complete measure
of the cost shocks aﬀecting each lender, which is critical for the purpose of accounting.
I construct the household credit supply shock to a county by weighting the lender ﬁxed
eﬀects with each lender’s market share in the county and then taking the sum. I show that
the measured shock constructed in this way will only reﬂect the true supply-side shock to
household credit plus measurement error. Thus, I have a measure of the shock to household
credit that can be used for quantitative accounting given certain assumptions. I deﬁne
the aggregate direct contribution of the household credit channel as the weighted sum of
measured shocks across counties multiplied by the elasticity of employment with respect
to the measured shock. This quantity gives the aggregate eﬀect of credit supply shocks
conditional on shutting down spillovers across counties. Because credit supply shocks are
not randomly distributed across counties and because I am using a noisy measure of the true
shock, direct estimates of the shock’s eﬀect will likely be inconsistent. I correct for these
issues by again using exposure to Wachovia as an instrumental variable. Consistent with
results above, my estimates show that shocks to household credit had signiﬁcant eﬀects on
employment, and that direct estimates might be signiﬁcantly biased downward. I construct
a lower bound to the aggregate direct contribution to correct for measurement error. I
ensure the calculation is a lower bound to the aggregate direct contribution by subtracting
a quantity, the average value of the shock in a speciﬁc subsample, from each area’s shock.
Under certain assumptions, this allows me to get rid of measurement error in a way that
will always understate the actual eﬀect. Using instrumented estimates, supply shocks to
1For example, papers using proxies for speciﬁc types of shocks are Cornett et al. (2011), Dagher and
Kazimov (2012), Goetz and Gozzi (n.d.), and Ivashina and Scharfstein (2010).
----------------CHAPTER 2. ACCOUNTING FOR SHOCKS TO THE HOUSEHOLD CREDIT
MARKET 55
household credit caused a decline in employment of at least 3.6% within the estimation
sample of counties in the South and East (60% of the observed decline), and 4.5% nationally
(64% of the observed decline). Using OLS estimates gives numbers roughly one-half the size.
For comparison, Greenstone et al. (2012) calculate an upper bound of 16% for employment
lossesduetoshockstosmallbusinesscredit. However, Chodorow-Reich(2014)usesvariation
from the syndicated loan market and suggests that credit shocks to ﬁrms can account for
more than 40% of the observed decline in employment. While all of these calculations are
partial equilibrium, together they suggest that the ﬁnancial crisis was a fundamental driver
of the Great Recession, with shocks to household credit being particularly powerful.
In the next section I lay out the accounting and estimation exercises in more detail. Sec-
tion 2.3 describes and constructs the measured shock, estimates the elasticity of employment
with respect to this shock, and then performs the accounting exercises.
2.2 Measuring the Aggregate Direct Contribution
Recall the simple framework introduced in Chapter 1 where the economy is composed of I
areas indexed by i. The log change in employment was given by the following equation
(cid:88)
E(cid:98) = βES S(cid:98) + βESS(cid:98) +v .
i i ij j i
(cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125)
j(cid:54)=i
localdirecteﬀect
Given this, the log deviation of total employment in the economy is the weighted sum of log
deviations for each area, where weights reﬂect each area’s share of total employment
(cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88)
E(cid:98) = ω E(cid:98) = ω (βESS(cid:98) + βESS(cid:98) +v ).
i i i i ij j i
i i j(cid:54)=i
The aggregate general equilibrium contribution of supply-side shocks to household credit on
employment is then the weighted sum of all terms relating to supply-side shocks to credit
(cid:88) (cid:88)
aggregate general equilibrium contribution ≡ ω (βESS(cid:98) + βESS(cid:98) ).
i i ij j
i j(cid:54)=i
This quantity answers the question of how much shifts in household credit supply aﬀected
aggregate employment. To calculate this quantity requires knowledge of βES, the spillover
eﬀects βES, and the distribution of shocks. It is generally infeasible to recover the spillover
ij
eﬀects because of the high dimension of the estimation problem (I−1 by I parameters when
we often only have I or, in a panel, I by T observations) and uncertainty about the spillover
structure.2
2See Stumpner (2013) for recent work estimating the role of trade linkages across areas, one potential
spillover eﬀect, in the Great Recession.
----------------CHAPTER 2. ACCOUNTING FOR SHOCKS TO THE HOUSEHOLD CREDIT
MARKET 56
A less ambitious, but still informative, quantity is the aggregate direct contribution of
the shocks to household credit
(cid:88)
aggregate direct contribution ≡ βES ω S(cid:98).
i i
i
Measuring the aggregate direct contribution provides a reasonable starting point for under-
standing the scale of the aggregate general equilibrium contribution. Critically, this quantity
ispartialequilibriuminthesensethataggregatepriceeﬀects(likedeclinesinthesafeinterest
rate) or reallocation across areas will not be captured. For example, as unemployment in
California increases in response to a shock, one of the “spillovers” is that aggregate unem-
ployment increases. The increase in the aggregate unemployment rate induces policy-makers
to reduce the Federal Funds Rate. This policy response aﬀects all counties and likely undoes
some of the eﬀects of the shock to California. However, the aggregate direct contribution
provides a well-deﬁned quantity that a structural model can target in calibration. Addition-
ally, theory might suggest that spillovers will be very small or, as in the example above, go
in the opposite direction, so that a small aggregate direct contribution indicates a small ag-
gregate general equilibrium contribution. The correct interpretation of the aggregate direct
contribution will depend on the model and what can be appropriately called a spillover, but
it clearly contains useful information.
While βES/βLS is informative, it does not tell us about the aggregate direct contribution
ofcreditsupplyshockstoemploymentlosses. Tomakeprogress, itisnecessarytoconstructa
measure of the true shock such that the measured shock will only reﬂect the true supply-side
shock and noise. Credit quantities and even prices are not useful here because they reﬂect
factors, such as demand shocks, that cannot credibly be thought of as noise. Assume that I
have an observed variable s that is linearly related to the true credit shock by the parameter
i
π and noise. Then I have the following system of equations
s = πS(cid:98) +v ,
i i si
E(cid:98) = βESS(cid:98) +v˜.
i i i
where Cov(v ,v˜) = 0 is the measurement error or noise assumption. Given that s is
si i i
observed by assumption, one could attempt to recover some measure of βES by estimating
the following equation
E(cid:98) = γ s +e .
i s i 2i
But it is straightforward to see that OLS gives the following, where σ2 is the variance of the
s
noise and σ2 is the variance of the true shock
S
   
(cid:44)
Cov(E(cid:98)i,si) = βES + Cov(S(cid:98)i,v˜i)  π + σs2 .
Var(s )  σ2   πσ2 
i S S
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125)
omittedvariablebias attenuationbias
----------------CHAPTER 2. ACCOUNTING FOR SHOCKS TO THE HOUSEHOLD CREDIT
MARKET 57
We have two potential issues. First, the true shock might be correlated with other factors
aﬀecting employment. Second, the fact that the measured shock is only a noisy measure of
the true shock attenuates the estimate.
An instrumental variable again provides a solution to these consistency issues. Assume
we have a variable Z still correlated with the true shock Cov(S(cid:98),Z ) (cid:54)= 0, but that now
i i i
satisﬁes the appropriate exclusion restrictions Cov(Z ,v˜) = Cov(Z ,v ) = 0. With these
i i i si
assumptions it is straightforward to see that
Cov(E(cid:98) ,Z ) βES
i i
= .
Cov(s ,Z ) π
i i
But notice that instead of recovering βES, we recover βES normalized by π. This is the
correct coeﬃcient to calculate the aggregate direct contribution under the assumption that
the weighted average of measurement errors is zero
βES (cid:88) (cid:88) βES (cid:88) (cid:88)
ω (πS(cid:98) +v ) = βES ω S(cid:98) + ω v = βES ω S(cid:98) = ADE.
i i si i i i si i i
π (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) π
i ≡si i (cid:124)i (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) i
assumedzero
This result is striking: with a valid instrumental variable and if the weighted sum of mea-
surement errors is mean zero, I am able to recover the aggregate direct contribution of the
household credit channel.
However, it is optimistic to expect that I can construct a measure such that the weighted
average of measurement errors is zero. I show below that even if the weighted average of
measurement error is non-zero, I can construct quantities that are plausible lower bounds to
the true aggregate direct contribution. Essentially, I can aggregate the diﬀerence between
the measured shock and a subsample mean of the measured shock. If the subsample mean
of the true shock has the same sign as the aggregate direct contribution, then the resulting
sum will converge to a lower bound to the aggregate direct contribution. So with a measure
of the supply-side shock to credit and an instrument I can recover the elasticity βES/π. This
can be combined with the measured shock to recover the aggregate direct contribution of
the household credit channel.
2.3 Constructing and Using a Measure of Credit
Shocks
The task in this section is to construct a measure of the supply shock to household credit.
I ﬁrst lay out a simple equilibrium model of credit across areas/borrowers and lenders with
monopolisticcompetition. Thisstructureimpliesthatthetruesupplyshocktocreditmarkets
is simply the weighted average of lender-speciﬁc shocks, where the weights reﬂect the lender’s
market share in that area. For example, in areas that depend only on Wachovia the true
----------------CHAPTER 2. ACCOUNTING FOR SHOCKS TO THE HOUSEHOLD CREDIT
MARKET 58
shock will only be the shock from Wachovia, while in areas borrowing from more lenders the
true shock will aggregate the shock from each lender in proportion to the lender’s market
share. The challenge then becomes approximating these lender-speciﬁc shocks. Using the
model,IprovideidentiﬁcationconditionsunderwhichIcanrecoverameasureofeachlender’s
cost shock from data on lender-borrower credit ﬂows (in practice, the HMDA data). So I
estimate a lender ﬁxed eﬀect where I control for demand shocks with borrower ﬁxed eﬀects.
The lender ﬁxed eﬀects are then measures of how much that lender was contracting or
expanding access to credit. Using these ﬁxed eﬀects, I construct a measure of the true
shock. I can then recover the elasticity of employment with respect to this measure using
an instrumental variable (see Section 1.3). Together, this elasticity and shock allow me to
estimate the size of household credit channel’s eﬀect on aggregate employment.
A Generic Model
Each area is a borrower that has demand for credit from each lender operating in the area.
Lenderssolveastandardmonopolist’sproblem. Theassumptionofmonopolisticcompetition
is central as it implies that variation in the health of an individual lender will have some
impact on the cost incurred by borrowers. This should be taken as a reduced form way of
capturing the various frictions that limit substitution across lenders. Evidence from Section
1.5 suggests this is a reasonable assumption, but to the extent that this assumption is
incorrect, I should ﬁnd no eﬀects. I log-linearize this model around an arbitrary equilibrium
point to arrive at simple expressions that can be linked directly to observables in the data.
While simple, this model is suﬃcient to describe how I identify the structural supply-side
shocks from data on credit ﬂows.
Credit Demand The quantity of credit demanded from a lender j by an area i is L and
ij
is given by the function LD. I assume each of these is a diﬀerentiable, invertible Marshallian
demand function that take lender-area prices r , the area aggregate price r , and demand
ij i
shifters d (for example, wealth or tastes) as inputs. The function is allowed to diﬀer across
ij
areas and lenders
L = LD(r ,r ,d ). (2.1)
ij ij ij i ij
The price r can be thought of as any cost incurred by the borrower that is set by the lender
(this could be down-payment requirements, probability of denial, and so on) and can easily
be extended to be non-scalar.
Credit Supply Lenders are monopolists who solve separable, static problems in each area.
Assuming the problems are separable across areas is a simplifying assumption. One could
instead imagine that the lender has an additional constraint that limits the equalization
of marginal revenue across areas. Allowing for these eﬀects would substantially complicate
the estimation by introducing non-linearities, but it could oﬀer eﬃciency gains. However,
without knowing the relevant factors or nature of the cross-area constraint introducing this
----------------CHAPTER 2. ACCOUNTING FOR SHOCKS TO THE HOUSEHOLD CREDIT
MARKET 59
dimension is likely to lead to misspeciﬁcation. I express the problem in terms of the inverse
demand functions r = r (L ) implied by 2.1. The monopolist faces a linear cost function
ij ij ij
σ (c )L that is diﬀerentiable and takes the level of lending and cost-shifters c as inputs.
ij ij ij ij
This gives the standard monopolist’s problem
maxr (L )L −σ (c )L . (2.2)
ij ij ij ij ij ij
Lij
Letting the price elasticity of demand be (cid:15)Lr and assuming it is constant, we have the
ij
standard solution for the monopolist’s price
(cid:18) (cid:19)
1
r = c / 1+ . (2.3)
ij ij (cid:15)Lr
ij
As is standard, the cost of borrowing is a markup over marginal cost determined by the price
elasticity of demand.3
The demand functions 2.1 imply some function R that aggregates lender-area prices into
i
an area-speciﬁc price r
i
r = R ({r (c )}). (2.4)
i i ij ij
Changes in lender-area costs c aﬀect borrowers through the price, so to construct the true
ij
credit shock to an area (that is, the change in price due to lender cost shocks) we must know
the aggregator function R . However, the demand functions are generally unknown and can
i
be diﬃcult to specify credibly.
Instead I take advantage of a central insight from index number theory to construct a
price index that is appropriate for a broad class of demand systems. Let ω and ω
ij,t ij,t−1
be the expenditure shares at the two points at which we are comparing prices. Then the
To¨rnqvist index, a superlative index, gives the percentage change in the price of credit to an
area as
1 (cid:88)
r = (ω +ω )r .
(cid:98)i ij,t ij,t−1 (cid:98)ij
2
j
Since Diewert (1978) and Diewert and Nakamura (1993) it has been understood that a
superlative index has theoretically desirable qualities: Any superlative index is a second
order approximation to any homothetic, twice-diﬀerentiable expenditure function.
Equilibrium It is useful to log-linearize the equations 2.3 and 2.1 around an arbitrary
equilibrium point. This gives us (ignoring approximation error)
r = (cid:15)rcc , (2.5)
(cid:98)ij ij(cid:98)ij
and from 2.1 we have
(cid:88)
L(cid:98) = (cid:15)Lrr +(cid:15)L ω˜ r +(cid:15)Ldd(cid:98) , (2.6)
ij ij (cid:98)ij i ik(cid:98)ik ij ij
k
3I ﬁnd it helpful to write this and other elasticities in terms their natural signs, and not the absolute
value of the elasticity as is sometimes done.
----------------CHAPTER 2. ACCOUNTING FOR SHOCKS TO THE HOUSEHOLD CREDIT
MARKET 60
where (cid:15) signiﬁes the appropriate elasticity. Because the price elasticity of demand and cost
functions are constant with respect to the quantity demanded, I can simply substitute for
price r into the expression for L(cid:98) to get
(cid:98)ij ij
(cid:88)
L(cid:98) = (cid:15)Lr(cid:15)rcc +(cid:15)L ω˜ (cid:15)rcc +(cid:15)Ldd(cid:98) . (2.7)
ij ij ij(cid:98)ij i ik ik(cid:98)ik ij ij
k
This equation describes how supply-side and demand-side shocks manifest themselves in
quantity changes between lenders and areas. Intuitively, a lender’s cost shock will aﬀect the
quantity borrowed directly due to the substitution eﬀect but also indirectly though its eﬀect
on the aggregate price. I can deﬁne the true supply-side shock to credit for the area as the
deviation in the area’s price due to the lender cost shocks
1 (cid:88)
S(cid:98) ≡ ω˜ (cid:15)rcc (2.8)
(cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)i(cid:125) 2 ij ij(cid:98)ij
trueshock j
If supply and demand shocks are positively correlated and are negative then the expectation
across areas of lender-area credit ﬂows will give a lower bound estimate of the lender’s
common shock
E (L(cid:98) ) = E ((cid:15)Lr(cid:15)rcc +(cid:15)LS(cid:98) +(cid:15)Ldd(cid:98) ) ≤ E ((cid:15)Lr(cid:15)rcc ).
i ij i ij ij(cid:98)ij i i ij ij i ij ij(cid:98)ij
That is, I will be attributing too much of the decline in credit to the lender as I will also be
including the local supply shock and the common demand shock. However, this and related
quantities can still be useful for accounting purposes, even if the quantities themselves are
not perfect measures of the supply shock coming from each lender.
To see this, assume for the moment that the additional shocks beyond the lender-speciﬁc
shock are mean zero for each lender: (unconditional)
E ((cid:15)LS(cid:98) +(cid:15)Ldd(cid:98) ) = 0, ∀j. (2.9)
i i i ij ij
Because this assumption is unconditional and because it requires the shocks be zero it is
stronger than necessary. In words, I require that the expected demand shocks be mean zero
for each lender after being projected onto the set of borrower ﬁxed eﬀects. It is easiest
to understand this condition by considering how it might be violated. For example, lenders
might select into the same sub-market within each county, such as specialization in subprime
lending markets across counties. If there is a shock aﬀecting the demand of all subprime
borrowers across markets then I will recover some of the decline in subprime demand in the
lender’s ﬁxed eﬀect. For the moment, I assume this condition holds. Next, label
ρ = E ((cid:15)Lr(cid:15)rcc ).
j i ij ij(cid:98)ij
Intuitively, if a lender tends to operate in areas where demand is very elastic then we will
estimate a larger ﬁxed eﬀect (conditional on the pass-through decision). However, if the
----------------CHAPTER 2. ACCOUNTING FOR SHOCKS TO THE HOUSEHOLD CREDIT
MARKET 61
distribution of the lender’s cost shocks is such that very responsive areas were exposed to
larger cost-shocks then we will also recover a larger lender eﬀect. The central point is that
the lender ﬁxed eﬀects will recover purely supply-side eﬀects for each lender. That is, ρ does
not contain any demand shocks d(cid:98). By construction it is also the case that the estimate is
correlated with the true input to the supply shock
Cov (ρ ,(cid:15)rcc ) (cid:54)= 0,∀i.
j j ij(cid:98)ij
I replace the true inputs βrc with the estimated lender ﬁxed eﬀects to construct a
ij(cid:98)ij
measure of the true shock
1 (cid:88)
s ≡ (ω +ω )ρ . (2.10)
i ij,t ij,t−1 j
(cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125) 2
measuredshock j
What is the relationship between the true shock 2.8 and my measure 2.10? Recall the
measurement relationship from Section 1.3
s = πS(cid:98) +v .
i i si
I would like to know ﬁrst, that π will not be zero, and second the mean of the residual. If π
is zero then my measured shock will not be correlated with the true shock and so it will not
be useful for accounting purposes. If the mean of the residual is non-zero then I will have to
construct the lower bound to the aggregate direct contribution. The answer falls into two
broad cases distinguished by a speciﬁc kind of selection between lenders and areas. Here I
describe the case with no selection as the case with selection is unlikely to be quantitatively
relevant.4
Proposition One The measured shock 2.10 can be decomposed into πS(cid:98) + v , where
i si
π = E (E ((cid:15)Lr)) (cid:54)= 0 so long as the price elasticity of demand ((cid:15)Lr) is non-zero. The
j i ij ij
measured shock will compress (|π| < 1), expand (|π| > 1), or match (|π| = 1) the true shock.
In monopolistic competition it must be the case that |π| ≥ 1. The expected measurement
error depends on interactions between market share and structural elasticities and will not,
in general, be zero.
See appendix A.2 for the proof, which involves only simple algebra and manipulation of
identities. So long as the price elasticity of demand is non-zero the measured shock will be
4The signiﬁcance of selection is eﬀectively a question about the value of the covariances
Cov (ω +ω ,βrec ).
i ij,t ij,t−1 ij ij
This covariance will plausibly be overstated by
Covi(ωij,t+ωij,t−1,L(cid:98)ij)
which I estimate to be essentially zero for all lenders. I also estimate the covariance with changes in denial
rates, a measure of price, and ﬁnd zeros. This suggests this type of selection is unlikely to be quantitatively
important.
----------------CHAPTER 2. ACCOUNTING FOR SHOCKS TO THE HOUSEHOLD CREDIT
MARKET 62
correlated with the true shock. The measurement error will only have mean zero in knife-
edge cases and without knowing the joint distribution of elasticities, shocks, and weights I
cannot sign the mean of the measurement error.
Theabovediscussionshowsthat, givensomeratherextremeassumptionsaboutthemean
of demand and supply shocks, we can recover a measure of the level of lender shocks. How-
ever, the assumptions about the means are too strong to be reasonable (and they preclude
many interesting situations). In the next section I present the weakest conditions such that
I can bound the aggregate direct contribution, a quantity of direct interest.
The logic for constructing the lower bound is simple. Assume there is a subsample of
the data such that the weighted average of the true shock has the same sign as the weighted
average of the true shock across the entire sample. Also assume that measurement error has
the same weighted mean in both samples. If I take the average of the diﬀerence between the
measured shock and the average within a subsample, the measurement error will cancel. I
will then be left with the average of the diﬀerence between the actual shock and the actual
shock’s average in the subsample. Since these have the same sign, I will have a smaller
quantity (pushed towards zero).
First, I state a standard result about the convergence of weighted averages of random
variables from Etemadi (2006). Let w be a sequence of positive weights where W =
i n
(cid:80)n w → ∞,
i=1 i
n−1(cid:18) (cid:19)
nw (cid:88) i|w −w |
n i+1 i
sup < ∞ and sup < ∞. (2.11)
W W
n≥1 n n≥2 n
i=1
Then if {X } is a sequence of random variables
i
n n
1 (cid:88) 1 (cid:88)
X → X ⇒ w X → X .
i 0 i i 0
n plim Wn plim
i=1 i=1
Withthisresultinhanditisstraightforwardtoconstructalowerboundtothetrueaggregate
direct contribution.
Proposition Two Assume (1) the true shock S(cid:98) is distributed with a non-zero mean, (2) the
i
measurement error is distributed iid with mean µ , (3) sequences ω ≡ w /W , ω˜ ≡ w˜ /W(cid:102)
e i i i j j j
both satisfy the conditions in 2.11, and (4) ∃k∗ ∈ R such that
(cid:88) (cid:88)
sgn( ω S(cid:98)) = sgn( ω˜ S(cid:98) ). (2.12)
i i j j
i j:sj≥k∗
Then the object
βES (cid:88) (cid:88)
aggregate direct contribution ≡ ω (s − ω˜ s ) (2.13)
i i j j
π
i j:sj≥k∗
converges in probability to a lower bound to the true aggregate direct contribution in that
the limit of the weighted diﬀerence is greater than the aggregate direct contribution if the
----------------CHAPTER 2. ACCOUNTING FOR SHOCKS TO THE HOUSEHOLD CREDIT
MARKET 63
aggregate direct contribution is less than zero. The opposite is true if the true aggregate
direct contribution is greater than zero.
Assumption (1) ensures the true aggregate direct contribution is always interesting (i.e.
signed). Given Assumptions (2) and (3) it follows that for any number k such that the set
s : s ≥ k is non-empty
j j
(cid:88) (cid:88)
plim ω v = plim ω˜ v = µ . (2.14)
i si j sj e
i j:sj≥k
Then I can construct the following object
βES (cid:88) (cid:88)
aggregate direct contribution = ω (s − ω˜ s )
i i j j
π
i j:sj≥k∗
 
(cid:88) (cid:88) βES (cid:88) (cid:88)
= βES ωiS(cid:98)i −βES ω˜jS(cid:98)j +  ωivsi − ω˜jvsj
π
i j:sj≥k∗ i j:sj≥k∗
(cid:88)
→ aggregate direct contribution−βES ω˜ S(cid:98).
j i
plim
j:sj≥k∗
Assumption (4) ensures the terms on the right-hand side have the same sign, so it must
be the case that if the aggregate direct contribution is positive then the object constructed
will always be less than the actual aggregate direct contribution, and if the aggregate direct
contribution is negative then this relationship is reversed. Therefore, the object calculated
here will understate the aggregate direct contribution of shocks in the limit.
Given this work, the critical assumption is that the measurement error is distributed iid
and so has a constant mean. Given this, one can make a simple assumption about the mean
of the shock and then take a diﬀerence appropriately. Consider again the measured shock
ρ = E ((cid:15)Lr(cid:15)rcc +(cid:15)LS(cid:98) +(cid:15)Ldd(cid:98) ).
j i ij ij(cid:98)ij i i ij ij
If the common component of demand shocks d(cid:98) is correlated with the common supply-
ij
component (for example, if contractionary lenders are more likely to be in areas with con-
tractionary demand shocks) then the error will not be iid. Instead, the measured shock
will be more negative (contractionary) in places with negative shocks. The implication of
this is that the mean of the error will vary conditional on the observed value of the mea-
sured shock, which would invalidate the approach to constructing the lower bound described
above. So it is critical to estimate the lender shocks in such a way that helps ensure the
errors are distributed iid. Because of the obvious concern of correlation between supply
shocks and demand shocks, a central objective should be to avoid conﬂating these shocks
with the lender-speciﬁc shock.
One approach to avoid this concern that can be examined analytically is to use the
lender’s shock net of the area average under the assumption that the common area-speciﬁc
----------------CHAPTER 2. ACCOUNTING FOR SHOCKS TO THE HOUSEHOLD CREDIT
MARKET 64
components net to zero
E (L(cid:98) −E (L(cid:98) )) = E (((cid:15)Lr(cid:15)rcc +(cid:15)LS(cid:98) +(cid:15)Ldd(cid:98) )−(E ((cid:15)Lr(cid:15)rcc )+(cid:15)LS(cid:98) +E ((cid:15)Ldd(cid:98) )))
i ij j ij i ij ij(cid:98)ij i i ij ij j ij ij(cid:98)ij i i j ij ij
= E (((cid:15)Lr(cid:15)rcc )−E ((cid:15)Lr(cid:15)rcc )+(cid:15)Ldd(cid:98) −E ((cid:15)Ldd(cid:98) ))
i ij ij(cid:98)ij j ij ij(cid:98)ij ij ij j ij ij
= E (((cid:15)Lr(cid:15)rcc )−E ((cid:15)Lr(cid:15)rcc ))
i ij ij(cid:98)ij j ij ij(cid:98)ij
This estimate it will misstate the actual shock (understate it if the average shock is negative
or overstate it if the average shock is positive). What it provides is an estimate of the
lender’s contraction relative to the average of other lenders in all areas where the lender
operates. Thus, the weighted average of these estimates will result in ranking areas as
having contractionary shocks if they are exposed, on average, to lenders who are more
contractionary than other lenders. Here we can ask does this estimation approach obviously
lead to a non-iid error structure if there is a correlation between demand and supply shocks.
Interestingly, the error structure likely ends up being non-iid but in a predictable manner.
To see this note that
(cid:88)
Cov ((cid:15)LS , ω E (E ((cid:15)Lr(cid:15)rcc ))) > 0.
i i i ij i j ij ij(cid:98)ij
j
That is, places with contractionary shocks are likely to have more contractionary lenders, on
average. Notice that this is not necessarily the case since the contractionary shock could be
arising to an exceptionally high weight. However, given that most weights are relatively low
in my example, this is unlikely. In this case the error would actually be negatively correlated
with the true shock and so compress the distribution. Under these conditions, the claim
that the procedure above produces a lower bound would still be valid, although the bound
created would be even more extreme.
Along these same lines, Greenstone et al. (2012) propose regressing changes in credit
quantities between areas i and lenders j on a full set of lender and area ﬁxed eﬀects, repre-
sented here as coeﬃcients on the dummy variables D (for an area i) and Λ (for a lender
i j
j)
L(cid:98) = α D +ρ Λ +e . (2.15)
ij i i j j ij
They then weight these ﬁxed eﬀects by the market share in a base period to construct
supply-side shocks to small business credit, the intuition being that the lender ﬁxed eﬀects
reﬂect changes in quantities driven by supply-side shocks. Amiti and Weinstein (2013) use
essentially the same approach to identiﬁcation and examine some of their largest lender ﬁxed
eﬀects from Japanese credit markets in detail. The variety of shocks driving the ﬁxed eﬀects
demonstrates the power of the methodology. Some shocks are related to the announcement
bya Japaneseregulatorof illegalactionsbyseveralﬁnancialinstitutions. Several otherswere
related to computer or “fat ﬁnger” errors, a memorable case being the trader who mistakenly
switched the intended price (610,000) with the intended quantity (one) of his trade. The
breadth of shocks recovered suggests the non-parametric structure of this approach is useful
in constructing a general measure of supply-side shocks.
----------------CHAPTER 2. ACCOUNTING FOR SHOCKS TO THE HOUSEHOLD CREDIT
MARKET 65
Unfortunately, it is impossible to express the solution to the normal equations solved
when estimating Equation 2.15, see McCaﬀrey et al. (2010) and Mihaly et al. (2010) for
more details and a discussion of estimation routines in this context. However, the condition
necessary to impose is that, conditional on the common borrower ﬁxed eﬀect, the correlation
between the measured shock’s error and the true shock is at least not positive. Under this
condition, which I will explore in later work through monte carlo experiments, it is always
possible to construct a lower bound to the aggregate direct contribution. To summarize, we
are able to recover a measure of the lender’s average cost shock that is non-parametric and
agnostic about the source of the shock.
The work above shows that I can construct a measured shock that is related to the true
shock, but we can expect to misstate the size of the true shock. I show that even if this
is the case, I can still construct a lower bound to the aggregate direct contribution of the
household credit channel. I now implement this procedure.
2.4 Estimates of Lender Shocks
I estimate the lender ﬁxed eﬀects using the growth rate of county-lender non-reﬁnance mort-
gages calculated from HMDA data between the sum of lending in 2005-2006 and the sum in
2008-2009. Results are also robust to aggregating to the metropolitan or commuting zone
level. I also restrict the sample to lenders operating in at least 30 counties, but alternative
cutoﬀs give very similar results. I drop extreme outliers, but my results are robust to win-
sorizing or not adjusting these observations, although it makes some diﬀerence with respect
to precision. The average area-lender percentage change over this period is about -24% (me-
dian -35%) with a very wide distribution (10th percentile is -.86% and the 90th percentile is
58%).
These restrictions reduce the sample from almost 9,000 individual lenders (after aggre-
gating to the top parent) to 360 lenders with over 67,000 lender-county observations. After
exclusions, the median number of counties operated in is 64, 40 at the 25th percentile, and
115 at the 75th percentile. Despite dropping so many lenders the remaining sample covers
52% of all lending in 2005-2006 and 66% in 2008-2009. This large change in coverage is
striking. Many of the smaller lenders and brokerages likely to drop from the sample are
generally thought to have depended on the securitization market, so that their contraction
is plausibly due to supply-side shocks (Engel and McCoy (2011)). To the extent that I
ignore the contraction from these lenders, I will likely be underestimating the size of the
supply shock.5 The estimation sample also represents about 51% of all assets reported on
call reports in 2006. Table 2.1 reports the regulator statistics for the entire sample of HMDA
lenders and the estimation sample. While the percentage of bank lenders (OCC, FRB, or
FDIC) is roughly similar (over 50%), we see that the restrictions signiﬁcantly reduce the
5Some of this diﬀerence might also be due to the decline in “double-counting” of loans in HMDA as
securitizations and purchase agreements fell. See Scheessele (1998), for a discussion of double-counting in
the HMDA data.
----------------CHAPTER 2. ACCOUNTING FOR SHOCKS TO THE HOUSEHOLD CREDIT
MARKET 66
number of small lenders as indicated by the decline in share of FDIC- and NCUA-regulated
lenders. The estimation sample has a roughly equivalent share of HUD-regulated lenders as
the overall sample.
A key assumption is the conditional version of the identiﬁcation condition 2.9, or that
the ﬁxed eﬀects do not reﬂect local demand or supply shocks. As an intuitive check of
this condition I estimate 2.15 with two levels of ﬁxed eﬀects: state and county.6 If the
identiﬁcation assumption does not hold then I would expect the lender ﬁxed eﬀects to vary
substantially as I include better “controls” for borrower demand (as I replace state ﬁxed
eﬀects with county ﬁxed eﬀects). Figure 2.4 plots the two sets of lender ﬁxed eﬀects against
each other. Both distributions tend to be concentrated below zero and are fairly symmetric,
suggesting most but not all lenders were contracting credit. The extremely tight correlation,
with the scatter plot essentially lying along the 45-degree line, shows that adding lower-
level ﬁxed eﬀects has almost no eﬀect on the lender estimates. If selection into counties
had been biasing the lender ﬁxed eﬀects down, for example, then this scatter plot would
lie predominantly above the 45-degree line: controlling for the county-level demand shocks
would absorb much of the negative eﬀect. This suggests the identiﬁcation assumption is
plausible. This ﬁgure also highlights the extreme nature of Wachovia’s lending contraction
as Wachovia is one of the most negative ﬁxed eﬀects.
2.5 Measured Area Shock and Instrumental Variable
Estimation
Given that the identiﬁcation assumption appears reasonable, I use the lender ﬁxed eﬀects
conditional on county ﬁxed eﬀects to construct the measured shock 2.10. The theoretical ex-
penditure share required by the price index for household credit is a conceptually and practi-
cally diﬃcult quantity. Without knowing utility functions it is impossible to properly weight
the various costs, both pecuniary and non-pecuniary (denial probability, down-payment,
ﬂexible vs. ﬁxed interest rate, etc) that compose the price. Even if we knew the weights
implied by the utility function, data on these additional prices are generally not available.
To simplify, I assume the true expenditure shares are given by the shares of household credit
lending in the HMDA data: ω is equal to lender j’s quantity of lending to area i divided
ijt
by the total quantity of credit borrowed by area i at time t. I construct the weights for the
same periods as the ﬁxed eﬀect estimates. Figure 2.2 shows the distribution of the measured
shock across all counties in the South and East subsample. Within this subsample the shock
is always negative with an average of about -.12.
Recall from Section 1.3 that even if the measured shock reﬂects only the true shock and
noise, it is still necessary to use an instrumental variable to get consistent estimates. This is
because the true shock is unlikely to be randomly distributed across areas and because noise
6To speed estimation of the ﬁxed eﬀects I use the code reg2hdfe provided by Guimaraes and Portugal
(2010).
----------------CHAPTER 2. ACCOUNTING FOR SHOCKS TO THE HOUSEHOLD CREDIT
MARKET 67
will attenuate my estimates. I showed that Wachovia was a valid instrumental variable for
supply shocks to household credit, so I employ it here as an instrument for the measured
shock. Intuitively, fromFigure2.4andSection1.5, IknowthatWachoviahadaverynegative
eﬀect on household credit supply, so when I know a county is exposed to Wachovia I expect
that the measured shock to also be lower (more contractionary). However, exposure to
Wachovia is also useful because I documented that it likely satisﬁes the exclusion restriction,
and so avoids omitted variable bias.
Table 2.2 shows that exposure to Wachovia is robustly associated with the measured
shock. The point estimate is very stable across speciﬁcations and not driven by outliers
(column three) or state-level shocks (column four). The validity of the instrument hinges on
Wachovia only aﬀecting the measured shock through Wachovia’s own shock. This implies
that I should ﬁnd no association between Wachovia exposure and the measured shock ex-
cluding Wachovia’s ﬁxed eﬀect from the measured shock. If I do ﬁnd a negative relationship
it would suggest that exposure to Wachovia is correlated with exposure to other lenders
who are transmitting contractionary shocks. This would lead to concern about the validity
of the exclusion restriction, although it would not necessarily invalidate it. Column six ex-
cludes Wachovia’s ﬁxed eﬀect from the measured shock and show that there is essentially
no relationship with exposure to Wachovia. This also tells me that exposure to Wachovia is
not correlated with measurement error, again validating the instrument. Figure 2.3 visually
conﬁrms the strong negative relationship between exposure to Wachovia and the measured
shock.
Given these strong diagnostics, I instrument for the measured shock with exposure to
Wachovia to recover βES/π, the elasticity of interest normalized by the measurement coeﬃ-
cient. I report the results in Table 2.3.7 First, the OLS estimate (unreported) suggests the
measured shock has an eﬀect on employment, but it is not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero.
The WLS estimate is much more precise and recovers a similar estimatee: a one percent-
age point in the measured shock implies a decline in employment of about .6%. However,
the instrumented estimates show that the direct estimate is signiﬁcantly biased downward.
Column two gives an estimate of 1.4%, while controlling for industry shocks and mortgage
leverage in column four suggests the eﬀect on employment is about 1.1%, still twice as large
as the direct estimates. Recall that π, which is essentially the average price elasticity of de-
mand faced by lenders, must be at least one since I have assumed monopolistic competition.
This means that βES ≥ βES/π so that the true elasticity of employment with respect to
credit supply shocks is at least one. Employment excluding tradables, reported in Column
four gives almost the same estimate.
Aggregate Direct Contribution
With estimates of βES/π, I showed above that I can calculate a lower bound to the aggregate
direct contribution of shocks to household credit with the following sum (also see Section
7I correct for the generated regressor with the clustered pairs bootstrap as before.
----------------CHAPTER 2. ACCOUNTING FOR SHOCKS TO THE HOUSEHOLD CREDIT
MARKET 68
1.3)
βES (cid:88) (cid:88)
aggregate direct contribution = ω (s − ω˜ s ). (2.16)
i i j j
π
i j:sj≥k∗
I sum the measured shock and then subtract the average of measured shocks greater than
some number. I then multiply this sum by the instrumented estimate of βES/π. So long
as the conditional average of the true shock has the same sign as the true aggregate direct
contribution then the resulting sum will converge to a lower bound to the desired quantity.
Table2.4reportstheestimatedeﬀectsontotalemploymentfortheestimationsampleand
for the national sample of counties with suﬃciently large population. The ﬁrst column uses
the coeﬃcient from column three of Table 2.3, to arrive at the eﬀect on total employment.
The second column uses the coeﬃcient for employment excluding tradables from column
four of Table 2.3. I then weight each area by the share of total employment given by
its employment excluding tradables. The resulting quantity is the implied eﬀect on total
employmentarisingfromdeclinesinemployment, ignoringthetradablesector. Forreference,
the total national employment decline in the CBP data is about 7.2% while the total decline
in the South and East is 6%.
The ﬁrst row reports the aggregate direct contribution without subtracting any quantity,
that is assuming the weighted sum of measurement error is mean zero. Ignoring bias in the
measure indicates the shock to household credit was massive: it predicts more of a decline
in employment than actually observed. While it is theoretically possible that spillovers or
other shocks undid much of this partial equilibrium eﬀect, it is likely that the measured
shock is overstating the true shock. The second row sets k∗ equal to the 75th percentile
of the measured shock within the subsample and then computes 2.16. The third row does
the same within the national sample of counties. The ﬁrst column shows that shocks to
household credit account for at least 60 to 62% of the observed declines in employment (3.6%
decline in the subsample and 4.5% nationally). The second column shows that limiting this
calculation to eﬀects on just non-tradable (in other words, excluding tradables) industries
gives very similar magnitudes. If I am even more conservative and set k∗ equal to the 66th
percentile the lower bound falls to 52/53% in the ﬁrst column.
These eﬀects are large. Diﬀerential price movements might undo some of these eﬀects
through trade, but Stumpner (2013) shows that the trade channel ampliﬁed demand shocks
similar to this one, which would mean the household credit channel would be responsible for
even more employment losses. Aggregate price eﬀects or policy responses might also undo
some of these partial equilibrium eﬀects, but the fact that the zero lower bound was binding
for much of this period limits the extent to which the safe interest rate could undo these
losses.
For comparison, Greenstone et al. (2012) assume all of the decline in small business
credit was due to supply, which captures at most 16% of the decline in total employment.
Chodorow-Reich (2014) performs a similar accounting exercise for the contribution of ﬁrm
credit shocks on employment from 2007-2009 and calculates a lower bound for the aggregate
direct contribution between 34 and 47% of 7%. Together with my calculation, these numbers
----------------CHAPTER 2. ACCOUNTING FOR SHOCKS TO THE HOUSEHOLD CREDIT
MARKET 69
suggest the crisis-induced contraction in credit was responsible for almost all of the decline
in employment. In contrast to both of these accounts, Mian and Suﬁ (2014) suggest that
over 50% of the decline in overall employment is due to the shock to household net worth.
But this calculation is made by assuming most of the change in household net worth is
exogenous, whereas much of this decline is likely the result of credit supply shocks. This
suggests their calculation overstates the household net worth channel. This is a distinction
between ampliﬁcation and shock since both the household and ﬁrm credit channels induce
changesinhouseholdnetworthandsowillresultinampliﬁcationduetochangesinhousehold
net worth. Hall (2012) provides a full general equilibrium accounting of the Great Recession
and subsequent slump into what he terms the ﬁnancial friction and household deleveraging
channels. This distinction is essentially between ﬁnancial frictions aﬀecting ﬁrms and those
aﬀecting households. Hall ﬁnds that, at impact, the household credit channel is responsible
forrougly30%ofthedeclineonimpactwiththissharegenerallydeclining. Giventherelative
size of my and Chodorow-Reich’s calculations this suggests that either general equilibrium
eﬀects amplify the ﬁrm credit channel and dampen the household credit channel or that the
decomposition of the data given by Hall’s model is biased in some manner.
2.6 Conclusion
With a simple model of credit markets, I show how to identify lender-speciﬁc shocks to
household credit using data on lender-borrower credit ﬂows. I then use these lender-speciﬁc
shocks to construct a measure of the shock to an area. I compute that contractions in
the supply of household credit caused employment to fall by 30 to 60% of the observed
decline. While this calculation ignores the general equilibrium response of aggregate prices
and policy, it suggests the recession would have not have been as severe if the supply of
credit to households and household demand had been maintained.
There are numerous avenues for future research. It would be informative to use the
quantities I recover here to calibrate a model that is explicitly cross-sectional. This would
allow us to understand how the partial equilibrium aggregate quantity and cross-sectional
elasticity recovered here discipline the aggregate general equilibrium quantities in which we
areultimatelyinterested. Furtherworkonthestate-dependenceoftheresponsetohousehold
credit shocks is also critical to understand when ﬁnancial shocks have large macroeconomic
eﬀects and when they do not. The policy response to Wachovia’s stress ostensibly avoided its
failure, but I document that there were still signiﬁcant eﬀects on the real economy even after
the policy response. This suggests there might be substantial room to better understand
and improve the policy response to distressed ﬁnancial institutions. It is also of ﬁrst order
importance to understand why there are signiﬁcant frictions to substitution across lenders
in the household credit market; without these frictions the failure of a particular institution
would be largely irrelevant. Finally, it is striking that the losses in employment and credit
seem to persist as a level eﬀect through the end of the observation period. This indicates
thattheremightbepotentialdistortionsinproductivityorthepresenceofpersistentdemand
----------------CHAPTER 2. ACCOUNTING FOR SHOCKS TO THE HOUSEHOLD CREDIT
MARKET 70
eﬀects related to household balance sheets.
----------------MC
AH
Figure 2.1: Checking the Stability of Lender Fixed Eﬀects RA
KP
Note: This ﬁgure plots the lender ﬁxed eﬀects from estimating regression 2.15, L(cid:98)ij =αiDi+ρjΛj +eij, on lender-county household credit ETTE
growthwithstateﬁxedeﬀects(horizontalaxis)andcountyﬁxedeﬀects(verticalaxis)andthe45-degreeline. Iftheidentiﬁcationassumption R
(equation 2.9) was inappropriate then I would expect diﬀerences in the estimates. For example, if the points were predominantly above the 2
.
45-degree line it would indicate that lender eﬀects were biased down (more negative) when controlling for state shocks relative to county
A
shocks. That the points lie along the 45-degree line suggests the identiﬁcation assumption is appropriate. All data are from HMDA.
C
C
O
U
5
. N
T
I
N
G
F
O
E) R
F S
y  H
nt0 O
u C
o K
C
S
(
  T
s
t O
c
e T
f
f H
E
  E
r
e5 H
d.
− O
n
e U
L S
E
H
Wachovia O
L
D
C
R
1
− E
D
−1 −.5 0 .5 I
T
Lender Effects (State FE)
7
1
----------------MC
AH
RA
Figure 2.2: Distribution of Measured Shocks in the South and East KP
T
E
Note: This ﬁgure plots the the distribution of the measured shock s within the subsample of counties in the East and South with at least TE
i R
50,000 residents and CCP data. A more negative number indicates a more contractionary supply shock to household credit. The measured
2
shock is deﬁned as si = 12(cid:80)j(ωij,t+ωij,t−1)ρj, where ρ come from the regression L(cid:98)ij =αiDi+ρjΛj +eij. .
A
C
0 C
2 O
U
N
T
I
N
G
5 F
1 O
R
S
H
O
C
y
t K
si S
n0
e1 T
D O
T
H
E
H
O
5 U
S
E
H
O
L
D
C
R
0
E
−.2 −.15 −.1 −.05 0 D
Measured Shock IT
7
2
----------------MC
Figure 2.3: Eﬀect of Exposure to Wachovia on the Measured Shock AH
RA
Note: This ﬁgure plots Wachovia exposure, measured as Wachovia’s average market share of non-reﬁnance mortgages from 2005-2006, KP
T
against the county’s measured shock to household credit supply. Counties with more exposure to Wachovia tended to have signiﬁcantly ETE
more negative (contractionary) measured shocks, showing that exposure to Wachovia is correlated with the measured shock. The bivariate R
regression line is also plotted in red and has a negative slope. The sample is limited to counties in the South and East with at least 50,000 2
.
residents and CCP observables. The measured shock is deﬁned as s = 1(cid:80) (ω +ω )ρ , where ρ come from the regression
i 2 j ij,t ij,t−1 j A
L(cid:98)ij =αiDi+ρjΛj +eij. See the text for more details. C
C
O
U
0
N
T
I
N
G
F
5 O
0 R
.
− S
H
O
k
c C
o K
h S
S1 T
d −. O
e
r T
u
s H
a E
e
M H
5 O
1 U
.
− S
E
H
O
L
D
2 C
−. R
E
D
I
T
0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1
Wachovia Exposure
7
3
----------------MC
AH
RA
KP
Figure 2.4: Simulated Measured and True Shocks T
E
TE
R
Note: This ﬁgure plots the measured shocks against the true shocks for a simulated example. The main point is that the diﬀerence
between the two appears to be distributed iid. See the appendix for details. 2
.
A
2 C
0 C
.
O
U
N
T
I
N
G
F
1 O
0 R
k.
c S
o H
h O
S C
 
d K
e S
r
u T
s O
a
e0 T
M
H
E
H
O
U
S
E
H
1 O
0
. L
− D
C
R
1.185 1.19 1.195 1.2 1.205 1.21 E
D
True Approximated Shock
I
T
7
4
----------------CHAPTER 2. ACCOUNTING FOR SHOCKS TO THE HOUSEHOLD CREDIT
MARKET 75
Table 2.1: Lender Regulator Proportions in Total HMDA Data and Estimation Sample
Note: This table reports the fraction of lenders under each regulator at 2006 within the set of lenders (360)
used to estimate the ﬁxed eﬀects and the entire HMDA sample (about 9,000 lenders). The estiamtion
sample is restricted to lenders operating in at least 30 counties. OCC stands for the Oﬃce of the
Comptroller of the Currency, FRB the Federal Reserve Bank, FDIC the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, OTS the Oﬃce of Thrift Supervision, NCUA the National Credit Union Association, and
HUD the Department of Housing and Urban Development. As expected the estimation sample includes
more national banks (OCC), which tend to be larger. Small lenders (FDIC and NCUA) are
underrepresented. The data are from HMDA, see the text for more detail.
Estimation Sample
OCC 0.30
FRB 0.20
FDIC 0.14
OTS 0.08
NCUA 0.05
HUD 0.22
Total
OCC 0.14
FRB 0.08
FDIC 0.32
OTS 0.07
NCUA 0.23
HUD 0.16
----------------CHAPTER 2. ACCOUNTING FOR SHOCKS TO THE HOUSEHOLD CREDIT
MARKET 76
Table2.2:EﬀectofExposuretoWachoviaontheMeasuredShock(FirstStage) Note:ThistablereportsOLSandquantilepointestimates,p-values,and95%conﬁdenceintervalsofthemeasuredshocktohousehold(cid:80)1creditregressedonexposuretoWachoviaover2005-2006:s=α+βWachoviaExposure+(cid:15)wheres=(ω+ω)ρ,andρiiiij,tij,t−1jjij2comefromtheregressionL=αD+ρΛ+e.TheﬁrstfourcolumnsshowthatexposuretoWachoviahadasigniﬁcantandrobust(cid:98)ijiijjijeﬀectonthemeasuredshock.Theeﬀectisrobusttostandardcontrolsandisnotdrivenbyoutliers.ThelastcolumnexcludesWachoviafromthemeasuredshockandshowthatexposuretoWachoviathenhasnosigniﬁcantrelationshipwiththemeasuredshock.ThesampleislimitedtothesubsampleofcountiesintheSouthandEastwithatleast50,000residentsin2006withCCPdata.Pairbootstrap-tusedtoconstructsymmetricp-valuesand95%conﬁdenceintervalsclusteredatthestatelevel.Allregressionsareweightedusingcountypopulationin2006. (1)(2)(3)(4)(5)OLSOLSQuantileOLSOLS-NoWachoviaβ/p/(CI)β/p/(CI)β/p/(CI)β/p/(CI)β/p/(CI) WachoviaExposure-0.677-0.656-0.538-0.3690.0250.0000.0000.0120.1560.270(-0.818,-0.535)(-0.810,-0.501)(-0.901,-0.176)(-0.921,0.183)(-0.520,0.569)MortgageLeverage2006-0.006-0.0110.4140.768(-0.018,0.005)(-0.046,0.024)HUDShare2005-0.013-0.0070.4620.198(-0.074,0.049)(-0.216,0.201)ConstructionShare2005-0.045-0.0300.3860.934(-0.119,0.029)(-0.222,0.161) FE–––StateStateN478478478478478Clusters25252525R20.2300.2460.2320.4290.286RobustF-stat28.3899.9937.0220.031
----------------CHAPTER 2. ACCOUNTING FOR SHOCKS TO THE HOUSEHOLD CREDIT
MARKET 77
Table 2.3: Eﬀect of Measured Shock on Employment 2007-2010
Note: This table reports OLS and 2SLS point estimates, p-values, and 95% conﬁdence intervals for the
elasticity of county-level employment with respect to the measured shock: E(cid:98)i = α +γsi +βXi +(cid:15)i. I
instrument for the measured shock with exposure to Wachovia over 2005-2006. The measured shock is
deﬁned as si = 12(cid:80)j(ωij,t +ωij,t−1)ρj, where ρ come from the regression L(cid:98)ij = αiDi +ρjΛj +eij. The
instrumentedestimatesareabouttwiceaslargeastheOLSestimate, suggestingsigniﬁcantattenuationbias
when only using OLS. Columns three and four control for household leverage ﬁxed eﬀects and the shares of
employment in ﬁnance, construction, real estate, and tradables. Column four limits the outcome variable to
employment growth excluding tradables. Sector deﬁnitions come from Mian and Suﬁ (2014). The sample is
limited to the subsample of counties in the South and East with at least 50,000 residents in 2006 with CCP
data. Pair bootstrap-t used to construct symmetric p-values and 95% conﬁdence intervals clustered at the
state level and adjusted for the generated regressor. All regressions are weighted using county population in
2006.
(1) (2) (3) (4)
WLS 2SLS 2SLS 2SLS-No Tradables
γ /p/(CI) γ /p/(CI) γ /p/(CI) γ /p/(CI)
Measured Shock 0.606 1.408 1.103 1.131
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
(0.305, 0.906) (0.816, 2.000) (0.598, 1.609) (0.606, 1.656)
Leverage Fixed Eﬀects – – Yes Yes
Industry Shares – – Yes Yes
N 478 478 478 478
Clusters 25 25 25 25
Robust F-stat 28.389 34.337 34.337
Table 2.4: Aggregate Direct Contribution of Shocks to Household Credit 2007-2010 (%
Change)
Note: This table reports calculations of the lower bound to the aggregate employment eﬀect of shocks to
household credit. The ﬁrst column reports calculations using the eﬀects of the measured shock on total
employment estimated using 2SLS and the second column uses WLS estimates. The ﬁrst row does not
correct for measurement error in the shock and suggests the household credit channel was responsible for
over 100% of the observed change in employment. The second row sets k∗ equal to the 75th percentile of
the measured shock and ﬁnds the household credit channel caused 57% of the employment decline within
sample and 60% nationally. These calculations suggest shocks to household credit had signiﬁcant eﬀects on
employment over this period. Explicitly, the numbers report
direct contribution= βES (cid:80) ω (s −(cid:80) ω˜ s ) for diﬀerent choices of the cutoﬀ k∗. See the text for
π i i i j:sj≥k∗ j(cid:98)j
details.
2SLS WLS
No Adjustment - South and East -11.8 -6.8
75th Percentile - South and East -3.6 -2.1
75th Percentile - National -4.5 -2.6
----------------78
References
Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino, “House prices, collateral
and self-employment,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2013.
Agarwal, Sumit, Brent W Ambrose, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Chunlin
Liu, “The role of soft information in a dynamic contract setting: evidence from the home
equity credit market,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2011, 43 (4), 633–655.
Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, Bruno Laranjeira, and Scott Weisbenner,
“Corporate debt maturity and the real eﬀects of the 2007 credit crisis,” NBER Working
Paper, 2009.
Amiti, Mary and David E Weinstein, “How much do bank shocks aﬀect investment?
Evidence from matched bank-ﬁrm loan data,” NBER Working Paper, 2013.
AP, “Wachovia Acquires Golden West Financial,” NBCNews.com, May 8, 2006.
Ashcraft, Adam B, “Are Banks Really Special? New Evidence from the FDIC-Induced
Failure of Healthy Banks,” American Economic Review, 2005, 95 (5), 1712–1730.
Avery, Robert B, Kenneth P Brevoort, and Glenn B Canner, “Opportunities and
issues in using HMDA data,” Journal of Real Estate Research, 2007, 29 (4), 351–380.
Baker, Scott R, “Debt and the consumption response to household income shocks,” Un-
published manuscript, Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA, 2013.
Beraja, Martin, Erik Hurst, and Juan Ospina, “The Regional Evolution of Prices and
Wages During the Great Recession.,” Working Paper, 2014.
Berger, Allen N and Gregory F Udell, “Relationship lending and lines of credit in small
ﬁrm ﬁnance,” Journal of business, 1995, pp. 351–381.
Berman, Dennis, Carrick Mollenkamp, and Valerie Bauerlein, “Wachovia Strikes
$26 Billion Deal For Golden West,” Wall Street Journal, May 8, 2006.
Bucks, Brian and Karen Pence, “Do borrowers know their mortgage terms?,” Journal
of urban Economics, 2008, 64 (2), 218–233.
----------------REFERENCES 79
Cameron, A Colin, Jonah B Gelbach, and Douglas L Miller, “Bootstrap-based
improvementsforinferencewithclusterederrors,”The Review of Economics and Statistics,
2008, 90 (3), 414–427.
Campello, Murillo, John R Graham, and Campbell R Harvey, “The real eﬀects of
ﬁnancial constraints: Evidence from a ﬁnancial crisis,” Journal of Financial Economics,
2010, 97 (3), 470–487.
Carroll, Christopher D and Miles S Kimball, “On the concavity of the consumption
function,” Econometrica, 1996, pp. 981–992.
Chioveanu, Ioana and Jidong Zhou, “Price competition with consumer confusion,”
Management Science, 2013, 59 (11), 2450–2469.
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, “The Employment Eﬀects of Credit Market Disruptions:
Firm-level Evidence from the 2008–9 Financial Crisis,” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, 2014, 129 (1), 1–59.
Cole, Jim, “4Q Earnings: Wachovia:Golden West Integration in Spotlight,” American
Bank, January 24, 2007.
Conley, Timothy G, “GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence,” Journal of
econometrics, 1999, 92 (1), 1–45.
Cooper, Daniel, “House Price Fluctuations: The Role of Housing Wealth as Borrowing
Collateral,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2013, 95 (4), 1183–1197.
Cornett, Marcia Millon, Jamie John McNutt, Philip E Strahan, and Hassan
Tehranian, “Liquidity risk management and credit supply in the ﬁnancial crisis,” Journal
of Financial Economics, 2011, 101 (2), 297–312.
Creswell, Julie, “Chief Calls Deal a Dream for Wachovia,” The New York Times, May 9,
2006.
Dagher, Jihad and Kazim Kazimov, “Banks’ Liability Structure and Mortgage Lending
During the Financial Crisis,” IMF Working Paper, 2012.
Dash, Eric and Julia Werdigier, “Wachovia Warns of 1.1 Billion in Credit Losses,” The
New York Times, November 9, 2007.
Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, Deniz Igan, and Luc Laeven, “Credit booms and lending
standards: Evidence from the subprime mortgage market,” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, 2012, 44 (2-3), 367–384.
Diewert, W Erwin, “Superlative index numbers and consistency in aggregation,” Econo-
metrica, 1978, pp. 883–900.
----------------REFERENCES 80
and Alice Nakamura, Essays in index number theory, Vol. 1, North-Holland, 1993.
DiMaggio, Marco and Amir Kermani, “Credit-Induced Boom and Bust,” Working
Paper, 2014.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, “Exchange Rates and Prices,” 1987.
Dorsey, Robert E, Haixin Hu, Walter J Mayer, and Hui chen Wang, “Hedonic ver-
sus repeat-sales housing price indexes for measuring the recent boom-bust cycle,” Journal
of Housing Economics, 2010, 19 (2), 75–93.
Eggertsson, Gauti B and Paul Krugman, “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap:
A Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (3),
1469–1513.
Engel, Kathleen C and Patricia A McCoy, The subprime virus: Reckless credit, regu-
latory failure, and next steps, Oxford University Press, 2011.
Etemadi, Nasrollah, “Convergence of weighted averages of random variables revisited,”
Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 2006, 134 (9), 2739–2744.
Feenstra, Robert C, Joseph E Gagnon, and Michael M Knetter, “Market share
and exchange rate pass-through in world automobile trade,” Journal of International Eco-
nomics, 1996, 40 (1), 187–207.
Genesove, David and Christopher Mayer, “Loss Aversion and Seller Behavior: Ev-
idence from the Housing Market,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (4),
1233–1260.
Gerardi, Kristopher, Lorenz Goette, and Stephan Meier, “Financial literacy and
subprimemortgagedelinquency: Evidencefromasurveymatchedtoadministrativedata,”
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working Paper Series, 2010, (2010-10).
Giannetti, Mariassunta and Andrei Simonov, “On the real eﬀects of bank bailouts:
Micro evidence from Japan,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2013, 5 (1),
135–167.
Goetz, Martin Richard and Juan Carlos Gozzi, “Liquidity shocks, local banks, and
economic activity: Evidence from the 2007-2009 crisis,” Working Paper, 2007.
Greenstone, Michael, Alexandre Mas, and Hoai-Luu Q. Nguyen,“DoCreditMarket
Shocks aﬀect the Real Economy? Quasi-Experimental Evidence from the Great Recession
and “Normal” Economic Times,” IMF Working Paper, 2012.
Gropp, Reint, John Krainer, and Elizabeth Laderman, “Did consumers want less
debt? Consumer credit demand versus supply in the wake of the 2008-2009 ﬁnancial
crisis,” 2014.
----------------REFERENCES 81
Guerrieri, Veronica and Guido Lorenzoni, “Credit crises, precautionary savings, and
the liquidity trap,” NBER Working Paper, 2011.
Guimaraes, Paulo and Pedro Portugal, “A simple feasible procedure to ﬁt models with
high-dimensional ﬁxed eﬀects,” Stata Journal, 2010, 10 (4), 628.
Hall, Robert E,“QuantifyingtheForcesLeadingtotheCollapseofGDPaftertheFinancial
Crisis,” manuscript, Stanford University, 2012.
Huo, Zhen and Jos´e-V´ıctor R´ıos-Rull, “Paradox of thrift recessions,” NBER Working
Paper, 2013.
Hurst, Erik and Frank Staﬀord, “Home is where the equity is: mortgage reﬁnancing
and household consumption,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2004, pp. 985–1014.
Ivashina, Victoria and David Scharfstein, “Bank lending during the ﬁnancial crisis of
2008,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2010, 97 (3), 319–338.
Kaplan, Greg and Guido Menzio, “Shopping externalities and self-fulﬁlling unemploy-
ment ﬂuctuations,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2013.
Kermani, Amir, “Cheap Credit, Collateral and the Boom-Bust Cycle,” Working Paper,
2012.
Khwaja, Asim Ijaz and Atif Mian, “Tracing the impact of bank liquidity shocks: Evi-
dence from an emerging market,” The American Economic Review, 2008, pp. 1413–1442.
Kline, Patrick and Andres Santos, “Higher order properties of the wild bootstrap under
misspeciﬁcation,” Journal of Econometrics, 2012, 171 (1), 54–70.
Lee, Donghoon and Wilbert Van der Klaauw, “An introduction to the FRBNY con-
sumer credit panel,” 2010.
Marquez, Jaime, “The econometrics of elasticities or the elasticity of econometrics: an
empiricalanalysisofthebehaviorofUSimports,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
1994, pp. 471–481.
McCaﬀrey, Daniel F, JR Lockwood, Kata Mihaly, and Tim R Sass, “A re-
view of Stata routines for ﬁxed eﬀects estimation in normal linear models,” Unpublished
manuscript, 2010.
Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Suﬁ, “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption,
andtheEconomicSlump,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128(4), 1687–1726.
Mian, Atif R and Amir Suﬁ, “What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?,”
Fama-Miller Working Paper, 2014.
----------------REFERENCES 82
Midrigan, Virgiliu and Thomas Philippon, “Household leverage and the recession,”
2011.
Mihaly, Kata, Daniel F McCaﬀrey, JR Lockwood, Tim R Sass et al., “Center-
ing and reference groups for estimates of ﬁxed eﬀects: Modiﬁcations to felsdvreg,” Stata
Journal, 2010, 10 (1), 82.
Moore, Heidi, “Wachovia-Golden West: Another Deal From Hell?,” http://blogs.wsj.
com/deals/2008/07/22/wachovia-golden-west-another-deal-from-hell/ 2008.
Niepmann, Friederike and Tim Schmidt-Eisenlohr, “No Guarantees, No Trade: How
Banks Aﬀect Export Patterns,” 2013.
Olea, Jos´e Luis Montiel and Carolin Pﬂueger, “A Robust Test for Weak Instruments,”
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 2013, 31 (3), 358–369.
Peek, Joe and Eric S Rosengren, “Collateral damage: Eﬀects of the Japanese bank
crisis on real activity in the United States,” American Economic Review, 2000, pp. 30–45.
Petersen, Mitchell A and Raghuram G Rajan, “The beneﬁts of lending relationships:
Evidence from small business data,” The Journal of Finance, 1994, 49 (1), 3–37.
and , “Does distance still matter? The information revolution in small business lend-
ing,” The Journal of Finance, 2002, 57 (6), 2533–2570.
Ramcharan, Rodney, Skander Van den Heuvel, and Stephane Verani, “From Wall
Street to main street: the impact of the ﬁnancial crisis on consumer credit supply,” FEDS
Working Paper, 2012.
Scheessele, Randall M, HMDA coverage of the mortgage market, Oﬃce of Policy Devel-
opment and Research, US Department of Housing and Urban Development, 1998.
Stanton, Richard, Johan Walden, and Nancy Wallace, “The Industrial Organization
of the US Residential Mortgage Market,” Annual Review of Financial Economics, 2014, 6
(1).
Stumpner, Sebastian, “Trade and the Geographic Spread of the Great Recession,” Work-
ing Paper, 2013.
Violante, Gianluca, Greg Kaplan, and Justin Weidner, “The Wealthy Hand-to-
Mouth,” in “2014 Meeting Papers” number 192 Society for Economic Dynamics 2014.
Weyl, E Glen and Michal Fabinger, “Pass-through as an economic tool: principles
of incidence under imperfect competition,” Journal of Political Economy, 2013, 121 (3),
528–583.
----------------REFERENCES 83
White, Ben, “Wachovia Splits Top Roles in Wake of Big Losses,” Financial Times, May 9,
2008.
Woodward, Susan E and Robert E Hall, “Diagnosing Consumer Confusion and Sub-
optimal Shopping Eﬀort: Theory and Mortgage-Market Evidence,” American Economic
Review, 2012, 102 (7), 3249–76.
----------------84
Appendix A
A.1 An Explicit Example and Simulation
Each area is populated by a single household with two partners. One partner decides how
much to borrow overall and the second partner must shop across all of the monopolistic
lenders in the area for credit. For simplicity, the problem is completely static so that credit
is necessary to purchase a certain good.
Household problem
maxlog(c )+γlog(H ) s.t. (A.1)
it it
c,H
c +p H +r L ≤ z +p H , (A.2)
it it it it it it it it−1
L ≤ p H . (A.3)
it it it
By appropriate choice of the parameter γ it can be assured that the borrowing constraint
will be binding so that
L = p H .
it it it
¯
I also assume that the supply of housing is constant so that H = H. Later I relax this
it
assumption. It is trivial to solve this problem for the price of housing
z γ 1
it
p = . (A.4)
it H¯ +γ r
it
Given the assumption that households are always against the borrowing constraint this
implies total loan demand is
z γ 1
it ¯
L = H.
it H¯ +γ r
it
Credit Demand
The household shopping partner must collect the required amount of loans from the set of
lenders in the area where there is a utility beneﬁt to using certain lenders and this is incurred
----------------APPENDIX A. 85
for each unit of credit. For example, the distance between the borrower and lender would
result in type of problem:
max U({L }) s.t. (A.5)
ijt
Lijt≥0
(cid:88)
r L ≤ r L ,
ijt ijt it it
j
I assume utility over lenders takes the Armington CES form:
(cid:32) (cid:33) ηi
(cid:88) ηi−1 ηi−1
U({L }) ≡ α1/ηiL ηi .
ijt ijt ijt
j
where the α are demand shocks that sum to one and η is the elasticity of substitution.
This gives standard expressions for demand from a speciﬁc lender
(cid:18)r (cid:19)1−ηi
ij
L = α L
ij ij i
r
i
and for the area-speciﬁc price index
(cid:32) (cid:33) 1
(cid:88) 1−ηi
r = α r1−ηi .
i ij ij
j
The ratio of credit ﬂows between a lender and area is then, once I substitute the expression
for L and hold constant housing supply and prices, simply
i
L α (cid:18) r r (cid:19)1−ηi z r
ijt ijt ijt it−1 it it−1
= .
L α r r z r
ijt−1 ijt−1 ijt−1 it it−1 it
I can close the model simply by assuming the same monopolists problem as before where
demand functions are now given by L . I assume that monopolist lenders face a linear cost
ijt
maxr (L )L −c L .
ij ij ij ij ij
Lij
Simulation
The shocks in the model above are to lender cost shocks c , demand shocks α , and to area-
ij ij
speciﬁc demand shocks z . In order to simulate the model I need to also set the number of
it
areas I, the number of lenders J, and the distribution of demand elasticities η ’s. I assume
i
the ratio of cost shocks c /C are drawn from normal N(µ ,σ2), which implies the levels
ijt ijt−1 c c
of costs are themselves drawn from log normals. The demand shocks for each period are
drawn from a uniform distribution and then rescaled to ﬁt the unit interval. The ratio of
----------------APPENDIX A. 86
income shocks to the area are drawn from a normal distribution. When I set η to be constant
across areas and equal to two, I draw it from a truncated normal with a lower bound (open)
of at least. As a baseline exercise I set the correlations across all observables to be zero.
I set the parameters of all of these distributions to comparable to those of the data. I set
I equal to 3000 (approximate number of counties) and J equal to 400 (approximate number
of lenders). For simplicity, I assume each lender is operating in each area.
I simulate the data and then construct the approximate shock in the same manner dis-
cussed in the text. Figure X plots the measured shock against the true shock. The slope is
reversedduetothemeasuredshockrelyingontheelasticityofdemand. Whilethereisclearly
dispersion in the measured shock, it is reassuring that the measurement error appears to be
iid. Regressing the change in lending on the measured shock gives estimates that are highly
signiﬁcant, but the coeﬃcient is essentially uninterpretable. In the simulation the supply
shock is responsible for a decline in total lending of 16%. Applying the procedure outlined
in the text where I correct the measured shock with the average of the measured shock in
the top quartile of the distribution. I calculate that supply shocks were responsible for a
decline of about -13%. Without correcting for the measurement error the implied decline was
essentially zero. Because the error was iid I was able to use the diﬀerence across the distribu-
tion to understate the aggregate direct contribution. While this is comforting, clearly more
work must be done on the robustness of this procedure to various assumptions regarding the
correlations across fundamentals as well as diﬀerences in other structural parameters.
A.2 Identiﬁcation Conditions
Let N be the number of observations, then in matrix notation model 2.15 becomes
L(cid:98) = Dα+Sρ+e,
where S is N × J, D is N × I, and α and ρ are I × 1 and J × 1 respectively. Let P ≡
D
D(D(cid:48)D)−1D(cid:48) (the projection matrix to the space of borrower dummies). Then we have
the following standard partitioned regression expression for the coeﬃcients on the lender
dummies
ρ = (S(cid:48)(1−P )S)−1S(cid:48)(1−P )L(cid:98).
D D
Let A be the I ×1 vector of common demand shocks for each area, ea the J ×I matrix of
lender-borrower demand shocks, C the J ×1 vector of common cost shocks for each lender,
and ec be the J × I matrix of lender-borrower cost shocks. Γ and B are the matrices of
structural parameters γ and β multiplying the demand and supply shocks with the same
dimensions as ea and ec respectively. Finally, let 1 be an N × 1 vector of ones. Then the
matrix representation of A.10 is the following where ◦ is the Hadamard/Schur product
L(cid:98) = SΓA+S(Γ◦ea)D(cid:48)1+DBC +S(B ◦ec)D(cid:48)1. (A.6)
----------------APPENDIX A. 87
Then the numerator of our lender estimates becomes
S(cid:48)(1−P )∆L = S(cid:48)(1−P )(SΓA+S(Γ◦ea)D(cid:48)1+DBC +S(B ◦ec)D(cid:48)1).
D D
In order for the lender ﬁxed eﬀects to be completely purged of demand shocks I require the
following conditions hold (in expectation)
S(cid:48)(1−P )SΓA = 0, (A.7)
D
S(cid:48)(1−P )S(Γ◦ea)D(cid:48)1 = 0. (A.8)
D
Decomposition of Measured Shock
To decompose the measured shock I use a slightly diﬀerent structure than that provided
in the text. Assume the following reduced form equations in terms of the demand and
cost shifters (essentially, I am ignoring the local supply shock and lumping it in with the
“demand” shock
(cid:15)rc (cid:15)rL(cid:15)Ld
r = ij c + ij ij d(cid:98)
(cid:98)ij 1−(cid:15)rL(cid:15)Lr(cid:98)ij 1−(cid:15)rL(cid:15)Lr ij
ij ij ij ij
≡ βrc +ζrd(cid:98) , (A.9)
ij(cid:98)ij ij ij
and
(cid:15)Lr(cid:15)rc (cid:15)Ld
L(cid:98) = ij ij c + ij d(cid:98)
ij 1−(cid:15)rL(cid:15)Lr(cid:98)ij 1−(cid:15)rL(cid:15)Lr ij
ij ij ij ij
≡ βLc +ζLd(cid:98) . (A.10)
ij(cid:98)ij ij ij
These are familiar expressions, but it is useful to review several coeﬃcients. The coeﬃcient
βr in A.9 gives the pass-through from changes in lender costs to borrower costs or prices.
ij
This coeﬃcient multiplied by changes in lender cost gives the total change in the cost of
borrowing from a speciﬁc lender, so that this is the supply-side shock to credit from a lender
j to a borrower i. The coeﬃcient βL, which multiplies cost shocks in the quantity equation
ij
A.10, is closely related as it is the product of the pass-through parameter and the price
elasticity of demand (βL = (cid:15)Lrβr) . Intuitively, the change in quantity borrowed reﬂects
ij ij ij
boththechangeinthepriceofcreditandtheeﬀectofincreasedcostsonquantitiesborrowed.
No selection between lenders and areas means that there will be zero covariance between
(1) area-lender weights and the idiosyncratic shocks, (2) area-lender weights and the struc-
tural elasticities, and (3) idiosyncratic shocks and structural elasticities. The true shock to
an area i is simply
1 (cid:88)
S(cid:98) = (ω +ω )βr(C +ec ). (A.11)
i 2 ij,t ij,t−1 ij j ij
j
----------------APPENDIX A. 88
The measured shock to the same area i is
1 (cid:88)
s = (ω +ω )E (βL)C
i 2 ij,t ij,t−1 i ij j
j
1 (cid:88)
= (ω +ω )E ((cid:15)Lrβr)C
2 ij,t ij,t−1 i ij ij j
j
1 (cid:88)
= (ω +ω )(E ((cid:15)Lr)E (βr)+Cov ((cid:15)Lr,βr))C
2 ij,t ij,t−1 i ij i ij i ij ij j
j
1 (cid:88) (cid:92) (cid:92)
= (ω +ω )[(E (E ((cid:15)Lr))+E ((cid:15)Lr))(βr +E (βr))+Cov ((cid:15)Lr,βr)]C
2 ij,t ij,t−1 j i ij i ij ij i ij i ij ij j
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
j
≡Ei((cid:15)Lijr) ≡Ei(βirj)
1 (cid:88)
= E (E ((cid:15)Lr)) (ω +ω )βrC +
j i ij 2 ij,t ij,t−1 ij j
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
j
≡π
1 (cid:88) (cid:92) (cid:92) (cid:92) (cid:92)
(ω +ω )[E ((cid:15)Lr)βr +E ((cid:15)Lr)E (βr)+E (E ((cid:15)Lr))E (βr)+Cov ((cid:15)Lr,βr)]C
2 ij,t ij,t−1 i ij ij i ij i ij j i ij i ij i ij ij j
j
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
≡ψi
1 (cid:88)
= πS(cid:98) −π (ω +ω )βrec +ψ
i 2 ij,t ij,t−1 ij ij i
j
≡ πS(cid:98) +v .
i si
The parameter π is simply the average across lenders of the average across areas of the
demand elasticity faced by lenders, which we fully expect to be negative and, importantly,
non-zero. This is exactly the relationship posited. The key questions then are about the sign
(cid:80)
and magnitude of the expected measurement error: are E (v ) (and ω v ) zero, positive,
i si i i si
or negative?
In general it is infeasible to sign or quantify the terms composing v without knowing the
si
joint distribution of these variables. Holding other elasticities constant, the pass-through pa-
rameterisdecliningasthepriceelasticityofdemandbecomesmorenegative. Thismeansthe
(cid:92)
unweightedaverageofE ((cid:15)Lr)E (βr)islikelynegative, butItaketheweightedaveragewhere
i ij i ij
the weights reﬂect market share. The correlations between market share and the demand
elasticity and market share and pass-through are theoretically ambiguous. Assumptions
about competition and the shape of demand can matter. Dornbusch (1987) and Marquez
(1994) provide models of where pass-through is increasing in market share. Feenstra et al.
(1996) shows this relationship can be strongly non-linear. Weyl and Fabinger (2013) provide
an excellent discussion of pass-through and welfare under various arrangements. Similarly,
the sign of Cov ((cid:15)Lr,βr) depends on the size of the other structural elasticities as well as
i ij ij
the relationship with market share. Thus, it is not only possible but likely that the average,
weighted or not, measurement error is nonzero.
----------------